e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e e
uh it was uh what's his
name Che
waiting on
right call meeting to order sh can do a
roll call
please Mr thank
you district one councilman Rios here
District Two councilman Pastor here
District three councilman leam present
District Four vice mayor steton here
District Five councilman Gonzalez here
District Six councilman Shipley here
mayor gameros here we have a core Mr M
thank you shall in the invocation pleas
yes um so tonight I'm going to share a a
reading and then we'll do a short prayer
this is uh called attitude by Charles
Swindle the longer I live the more I
realize the impact of attitude on my
life attitude to me is more important
than facts it's more important than the
past than education than money than
circumstances than failures than success
than what other PE people think or say
or do it is more important than
appearance giftedness or skill will make
or break a company a church a home the
remarkable thing is that we have a
choice every day regarding the attitude
we will Embrace for that day we cannot
change our past we cannot change the the
fact that people will act in a certain
way we cannot change the inevitable the
only thing we can do is play the one
string we have and that is our attitude
I am convinced that life is 10% what
happens to me and 90% how I react to it
and so it is with you we are in charge
of our
attitudes dear Lord thank you for this
day and uh please bless all those people
who endure in public service and to help
other people have have better lives and
thank you for all the people that
believe that our best days are ahead of
us amen amen fr the Pledge yes Mr Mayor
i al to the flag of the United States of
America and to the Republic for it
stands one nation under God indivisible
with liy and justice for
all we'll start with summary of current
events
um are you on a we'll start with you D
Mr Mayor in a long career in Emergency
Management this is the month that I call
the double whammy because we have had
fires and floods in heila County so
please be aware of your surroundings
check the clouds check the weather and
please stay away from lighting fires
that's all I have Mr Mayor thank you sir
thank you mayor for um I would like to
CH thank John andulo and Public Works um
I didn't have your phone number I would
have called you to thank you personally
but um we had a lot of weeds over by the
panel cemetery on the one side of this
city property and they were really dry
and really bad so I brought it up to to
John and he got his guys out there
pretty quick and got it cleaned up so
thank you appreciate it and uh that's it
I thank you Freddy uh thank you mayor I
have some rather exciting news at least
it is for me but I I hope it is for
everybody else but um our Hill Street
School housing project Apartment project
is now online and taking applications
so um that's you know one step closer to
that place being opened up uh really
excited about this um you can find the
information on the website uh just go to
uh ww. www. hillstreet
school.com um the phone number is
928
255
5605 and they also have a physical
address uh on site and that's at
435 South Hill Street they're open
Monday through Friday from 9:00 am to
5:00 P p.m. so you have every
opportunity website uh in person or over
the phone uh and I was diving into the
website earlier today it's uh really
pretty cool it's it's night it's just
neat to see and and it's really exciting
so um it's open for uh for business so
all of you that are interested um get
your applications in thank you mayor
thank you FR
Mike uh Mr Mayor I don't have anything
today thank you thank you good to see
you back thank you Jesse thank you Mr
Mayor the chamber's holding a candidate
Forum tomorrow June 26 at 6 pm here in
the chambers and on Thursday June 27th
they the chamber is holding their annual
meeting at the globe the old Globe Cafe
at 6m and they'll be serving advertises
and refreshments for anybody that wants
to join that's all I have mayor thank
you just Mike thank you mayor uh I only
have one thing uh tonight uh as
everybody knows uh a well-known person
Tom Foster passed away last week uh so I
would like to do a moment of silence Tom
was a an incredible person and a just a
guy that knows everything every time I
talk to him he just always had
information on anything that you have a
question on so uh he'll be J most so I'd
like to do a moment of silence
room thank you mayor that's all I have
thank you Mike I have a couple of things
uh first uh uh we do have I think Phil
Stewart's going to give us a little more
information he's in the audience uh they
they will have a candle light vigil this
Friday he's going to explain a little
bit his call to the public also they
have requested the flags in our city uh
be flown at half staff also they'll be
flying them half in Miami and I think
it's Superior also so uh we will uh we
will also go along with with that
request also uh so I'm not going to go
into it anymore I'm going to let Phil
explain a little more about that uh
Fourth of July they still the fireworks
are still going to happen with free port
and I think they're it said 900 p.m.
thought it was pretty late late but I
don't know it was but I think it's going
to be the 4th of July which starts
really the um an event uh that's going
to linger on from the 4th and then into
our first Friday and over the weekend um
so they're still doing it and what's
going to happen on First Friday on the
5th is there going to be a ceremony here
and I'll be on vacation our vice mayor
Mike Mike Stapleton will be stepping in
for me uh they'll be reading the
proclamation that we're going to sign
tonight and there will also will be I I
don't know exactly what they have but
they'll be honoring uh retired army
colonel Larry Pino uh that day also and
I think it extends into the weekend
there's a long schedule it's on the
website if anybody would like to take a
look at that um the last thing I have is
I want to congratulate uh Lisa Fletcher
our our assistant to our clerk for
graduating from the project Central
Academy the leadership academy I think
she's a second one I think Michelle
graduated the last group and I think we
have another individual I think Vince is
putting in for the next one which and
it's kind of a neat program I get they
get to travel all over Washington Mexico
everywhere so but it's a great program
for to go through to help V your
confidence and Leadership uh abilities
so congratulations to her on completing
that uh that's all I have um Mr Mayor
members of council um still a lot going
on very busy but um I would like to
thank um uh both our our financial
consultants Pat Walker Dennis o oich and
Tina Allen who have gotten us through
yet another budget cycle and we're about
to to consider the the tenative budget
um and then we'll have final in three
weeks um but but even more so has been
our staff our directors managers uh and
supervisors and that have all worked
with each other and with me and been
very patient with me is as we went
through this process uh met um kind
sometimes on the Fly sometimes I'm just
showing up at their door and saying
let's talk about the budget and
sometimes they're like where is he
because I'm hunting down on to zoom with
Tina and uh so we we've done a lot gone
to a lot it's worked out worked out well
uh very proud of this budget think it's
a as a conservative uh budget as as it
should be but it keeps our vision and
our momentum rolling um even even though
we're we're still going through our
audits to to nail down our fund balances
but no surprises have happened and we
don't expect any in the future uh I
think you'd be very happy it's a it's a
very solid um uh road map to the
future thank you thank you so next we
have our first Community call to the
public and this is a time when the
public can address the council as a
whole um we as a council cannot respond
to you uh during this time but we can
direct our staff after there are some
issues that need to be followed up it is
limited to about 3 minutes so uh we'll
call the first one I have Phil Stewart
he'll be coming up for and just state
your name up
here good evening mayor and councel
citizens my name is Phil Stewart and I'm
the president and director of bullion
Plaza Cultural Center and museum and I
come here tonight to ask you
to please come join us uh this coming
Friday evening at 8 o' we will be
holding a candlelight
vigil uh to hopefully start and
facilitate the healing process after a
very dear and endearing man has been
taken from us by the scourge of
cancer and uh we will begin the ceremony
at 8:00 on the front steps of bullan
Plaza and it'll be a brief ceremony
and then after that we'll go through the
museum and end up in the gym directly
behind the museum uh where it'll be nice
cool air conditioned we'll have a light
meal and U an opportunity for people to
share stories of Mr Foster if they so
choose so and again thank you so much
for your support and and honoring Tom
with the lowering of the flag we
definitely appreciate that and um again
please come and join us thank you thank
you
Phil next I have a card from Carmen
Casas uh speaking on behalf of the kby
Valley Youth
Club thank you mayor and Council I hope
I can do this within three minutes but I
just wanted to share the Cobra Valley
Youth Club is open again for business
and I thought it was extremely important
to come before you for these few minutes
and just share the reason that it is
open we talk about it takes a village
for our kids well it took the city of
globe to open our building and I just
wanted to give thanks to these people
that really joined in and helped us to
get going and off our feet within a very
short period of time first of all Paul
jebson when I was called by shy Salazar
to say come and meet with him I was like
oh my gosh no what you know but thank
you Paul for starting the ball rolling
um Shel Salazar John Angulo wherever
John's at I always have his number he's
always there Linda adeto Melissa still
Michelle jurovich Lisa Fletcher Tom the
Fire Marshall who would have to show me
pictures because I don't understand that
lingo so a lot of time also told Pony
who took a lot of time with me to make
sure that things were done you don't
know how much I appreciate that um kept
coming back and checking Mary Helen
Salazar who um issues the permits she
really worked with us um the city of
glob Public Works who were always there
to pick up after Fernando had spent many
hours chopping down the Oleanders in the
back so they were there to come and pick
up the trash um also Jodie and um um and
oh my goodness she's my neighbor jod
Ginger Ginger yes and ginger holy smokes
um who were always there to answer my
calls uh MDC electric jovic plumbing
hila monster construction esta glass and
Jack anas the reason that I'm mentioning
them is because they went in and did the
work but they did a lot of extra for us
so I highly recommend them they are
amazing to work for uh our amazing board
Brian Romney Dr Richard Ramos Regina
Ortega Alexis Rivera Fernando Shipley
and without our staff Amber Miller Arisa
and Annabelle we couldn't have got a lot
of this going but most of all I want to
recognize uh our representative David
Cook who put us on his budget and
because of that we were able to open so
um huge thanks to representative David
Cook I know he's running again this
isn't political but I need to give him a
big shout out and most most of all to
Fernando you stuck it through you were
there and you stayed with the whole
thing so I know that this club is
supposed to be because we have been
knocked down so many times and we keep
getting back up with all these people
that have uh faith and trust in us and
most of all the parents who have sent
their kids there so I just wanted to do
a quick thing thank you to let the mayor
and Council know what an amazing um
staff that you have and that they are
there so and thanks to Paul to get the
ball rolling thank you again Paul um
thank you I I'm going to ask that I
could be on the agenda so I can give an
update of what's what's going on we have
about 25 people within or 25 kiddos
within about a week and a half that are
coming back so we're growing so I'd like
to I'm always proud to
to talk about the club so thank you very
very much and thanks to everyone thank
you car thank you car Paul you put it on
a future agenda yes we will add that to
the Future agenda thank you mayor
okay any other
uh public online or on um no nothing in
email anything on the phone no Mr Man
and no one approaching the podium so I
think we're good thank you so we'll go
to special presentation and ceremonial
matters so item 3A is is mareros Will
present and Proclaim July 5th 2024 as
lar Pino day honoring United States Army
retired Colonel Larry Pino for his
courage and heroism during the Blackhawk
Down operation on behalf of the city of
globe Council so I'll read the uh
Proclamation uh this Proclamation will
also be read on First Friday on the 5th
uh by vice mayor uh
Stapleton during that ceremony uh we
will present this to I think there's
some individuals here to take this one
but we'll also have a framed one for
Larry on that day on July
5th so this is uh honoring Colonel Larry
Pino United States Army retired whereas
C Colonel Larry Pino a
2024 Globe High School Hall of Fame
inductee has served his country in
distinction and honor including his
involvement in Special Operations and
whereas Colonel Larry Perino played a
crucial role on October 3rd 1993 during
operation Gothic serpent in magadia
somolia today it is known as Blackhawk
Down and then first lieutenant Larry
Pino serving as platoon leader for the
Third Battalion 75th Ranger regimen
conducted a fast rope insertion into the
Black Sea District of magad disu while
under in intense fire from automatic
weapons and Rocket Propel grenades upon
notification that an mh6 helicopter had
been shot down several blocks away he
and his element quickly moved to the
crash site and helped secure the
aircraft until reinforcements arrived
the following day first lieutenant
Marino's courage and heroism reflect
great credit upon him and the United
States Army Colonel Pino was awarded the
Silver Star our nation third highest
honor for gallantry and B bravery for
his actions whereas Larry Pino service
exemplifies the highest ideals of the
military and serves and an inspiration
to all who hear his story and whereas
larino has continued to support his
community and fellow veterans embodying
the spirit of a true Hometown heing now
therefore I Algos Mar City Globe do
hereby Proclaim July 5th 2024 as Larry
Pino date in recognition of his selfless
service and wavering commitment to
duty in witness of I have hun here set
my hand and caused the Seal of the city
of glow to be affixed on the 25th day of
June 2024 so we'll present this to uh Mr
Germain and uh if you haven't seen the
movie go see the movie I had to see it
after I was told about Larry it's an
amazing movie Blackhawk Down uh so I've
seen it a couple of times now
[Music]
leave the S okay
[Music]
[Applause]
so item 3B
now presentation of air ambulance
membership plans and cost for both
residential and employee coverage from
Adam Martin membership sales manager and
Jeff Miller director of membership for
air Medcare Network Banner air and from
Kevin Gorski Senor membership manager
for Phi
cares so if you want to come to the
podium and just state your
name and and Mr Mayor while they're
getting positioned uh we traditionally
have uh purchased um
helicopter emergency coverage for the uh
both our um thank you sir staff and uh
last year for certain amount of
residents um there's a more discussion
this year because it's kind of split
50/50 between the two companies
represented um here tonight and so we
wanted to have a a dual presentation of
both of the the major players in here
and some uh features and costs I know
mayor you have a lot of questions and
Council May so we can better make a
decision about how we move forward
possibly with these amenities so Mr
Mayor I turn it back to you to go
ahead thank you mayor council uh my name
is Jeff Miller I am the director of
membership with Banner air and tonight
with me I have Adam Martin our local
membership sales manager and also Amanda
wigman who is Banner er's business
develop with operations a little bit
about us uh Banner air is a
hospital-based air medical uh transport
program we provide critical and
life-saving air Medical Services
throughout the entire State uh we have
four bases uh located in the valley and
rim country um that provides seamless
air ambulance transportation to our
communities our locations include uh Pac
Sun City West Queen Creek and kasag
Grant tonight we have for you a proposal
for you're going to hear me say MSP um
that's Municipal s plan which you'll
probably know as like Citywide coverage
um the information you have there in the
folder on the left hand side is really
the banner air overview along with some
facts about what we're offering tonight
and on the right hand side of the folder
you actually have a a couple of
agreements that we've actually prepared
for you so you can see what those
Agreements are in case you have any
questions um our first option that we
want to present from an MSP standpoint
to cover the city of globe would be if
your residents were to be transported by
Banner air within hila County um in
essence what happens with that is
insured city of globe residents are
guaranteed zero out of pocket expenses
when transported by Banner air per the
terms and conditions of the uh MSP
regardless of what insurance they have
or even if the transport was deemed
medically not
necessary um uninsured City Globe
residents would be built at the Medicare
allowable rate uh this allows us to keep
the MSP cost down while also um allowing
us to meet exacting Financial
requirements under applicable Medicare
rules um the MSP for hila County pickup
uh is a total of 20 27,2
41 we also have a secondary option
should you be interested um with
adjacent counties um of Maricopa panol
and Coconino if you were to go that
route and choose the adjacent County
plan Excuse me while I pull this out of
here so make sure I get the numbers
right for you the total for that plan
would be
31599 so in essence with that plan any
City resident of globe that was flown
from one of those counties I just
mentioned America opol Coconino and hila
transported by Banner air would have
zero out of pocket expenses and that's a
guarantee um with any of our membership
programs we do bill with insurance um
but even with the no surprises act um
patients responsibility uh the NSA does
not remove their cost sharing
obligations so without an a ambulance
membership if you're flown we will Bill
Insurance we're not allowed to balance
bill because of the NSA but you yourself
as the patient or guarantor would still
be responsible for any cost sharing
obligations in the form of co-pays co-
insurance is deductibles so this
Citywide plan the municipal site plan
would remove that from your residents
and guarantee them zero out of pocket
cost if FL by Banner error lastly I will
say that we also have an opportunity for
your employees and based on the
information I've been given and I know
Adam has has worked with Pam uh and
Human Resources I believe uh as far as
employees of the city of globe you
currently have 62
nonresident uh employees that would not
be covered under uh the MSP uh so we
would offer them uh a plan to get those
up those 62 as well covered that would
be
$4,030 to add that
group and from there I'll pause and uh
see if you have any questions for us
that we could answer and Mr may members
Council just to clarify that the 62
people who do not live in in city of
globe proper not necessarily don't live
in the region 62 out of how many
employees in GL uh were we about 135
right now3 139 % of our
employees
questions the 4,000 additional would
cover the 62 non City residents in hila
County only though no that's actually
since our standard membership protocol
we don't have a partial membership they
would actually have the full Banner a
membership would actually those 60 be
covered anywhere in the stat in the
United States in the entire State of
Arizona entire State form by Banner
okay and we know the city currently has
a Phi Carriage membership we feel like
this is an opportunity uh to either you
know consider purchasing this as a
second option um and we're happy to
answer any questions I brought some of
our operational experts with us in case
you have questions about that we
appreciate the opportunity
um so you mentioned that if they don't
have so if they have insurance then
we'll build the insurance company for
whatever the agreement is with the
insurance company that they would cover
right that's correct we we will build
insurance and then if they fall under
our plan then they would the rest of it
would be waved any other yeah that's
correct so they their co- their cost
sharing obligations in the form of
co-pays Co Insurance deductibles
basically guaranteeing zero out of
pockets and then if they don't have
insurance you're going to Bill them at
the Medicare rate but is that build to
them then yes okay any uninsured
resident that would be flown would be
build at the Medicare allowable rate
okay and so this
wouldn't what would what would this
would this help them at all if they did
not have any insurance yeah the Medicare
label rate even though I don't have an
exact number because it fluctuates uh
but that's highly discounted compared to
a uh normal bill process so U we do that
for several reasons number one um you
know it's required that we have
insurance so when we fly somebody
without insurance we will build them at
the Medicare all rate but that is highly
discounted compared to normal billable
charges okay okay so there's still a
benefit it's just oh yes absolutely
okay thank
you go ahead given the last year how
many times would you say Banner air has
flown residents from he County from
Globe profit so since August um it's
mostly under Queen Creek so our que
Creek is Manner three we have about a 25
response time up to the globe area I'd
say we're doing five to 10 a month last
year has been a little bit signicant
most of them have been seen call we few
C okay thank you five to 10 mon do we
know what the total is that we that's
flowing is that is that a 40% 50% 60% of
the flights that come out of globe I
don't I don't number so I can't really
speak to that just know what error is
done since
we and you have a 20 you said a 25
minute response respon sign out of que
Creek Mr Mayor I would like to say too
that I've skipped over the fact that we
do allow upgrades for your residents as
well so if the city was to purchase this
plan for the residents we would allow
them to upgrade to a full Banner err
membership $45 upgrade or for our
seniors UH 60 plus we offer a full
upgrade to $35 for $35 and that would in
essence give them the full Banner air
membership across the entire
State what is the initial cost if a
resident were to do it on their own
without the upgrade yeah it's $85 is our
standard price $65 for 60 plus so that's
a household membership covers anybody
Under One Roof for those rates so $120
to $150 with the upgrade for both those
groups
correct this is Mr go ahead Mike and
this is applicable to just a member or
what about our family members yes so
under the city plan if you were to
purchase the Citywide plan it would be
anybody that is a resident of the city
of globe would have the coverage okay so
that would cover them completely that
way now our traditional household
memberships would be anybody that lives
on Under One Roof whether they're family
or not it doesn't matter as long as
they're a household member they would be
covered under that membership so ideally
what would sorry I'm sorry go ahead
that's okay go ahead go ahead so ideally
what would happen would be that if the
city of globe decided to make this
purchase for the Citywide membership we
would then go and try to upgrade these
households so that they have that full
membership and then anybody they have in
that household will be covered anywhere
across the state if Fall by Banner
a go ahead thank you may
uh you had mentioned the upgrades of uh
two prices 35
and 40 something um is that a the annual
upgrade yes that's $45 for the year yeah
correct so again if if we if we go
through with the MSP uh we would then be
able to upgrade the residents of the
city of globe $45 per traditional
household $35 for households with
someone sixe older in the household that
would give them a full membersip ship
for annual PR that whole calendar
year question Mr Mayor go ahead mik so
um and this is strictly through Banner
correct that is correct yeah everything
we're speaking of now would be our four
Banner locations Pac Sun City West Queen
Creek CAG gr those are our
locations okay because I spent a lot of
time this SL summer with
Banner I'm just trying to figure out so
you're free so
fre
fer but the question being
is if I got flown down there would my
wife fly along with me or does she have
to go on her own that's trly just taste
by case um we try to take family members
if we can but it depends on the heat
depends on the weight and we're able to
take the weight of you and your wife um
so it's truly Case by
case um so
because you have four
locations does that designate the flight
whoever the patient is go to your that
specific hospital or they can be flown
to any hospital they can be flown to any
hospital it's truly normally it's your
sending doctor makes that determination
on where the patient goes uh but Banner
air flies in and out of all hospitals
not just Banner okay and if it's a scene
call we normally work with the local
fire departments and EMS to see where
they want us to take the patient or if
the family has a preference on where we
go if they have former care a dignity or
and we'll honor that and take
them thank you I guess just to clarify
for our residents too is that if you're
at the hospital you're going to be flown
to the valley and you have a certain
Insurance you can request that
helicopter but if on you're on an
emergency scene you don't have that that
uh you aren't able to make that decision
it's the
closest uh helicopter to the scene to
make it there and so if it's you and we
have Phi um Insurance we're not cover
yeah so 100% so a couple things to to
consider number one we're a membership
product so both ourselves and Phi both
membership products not Insurance
there's no reciprocal agreements or no
reciprocity between the two competing
air companies so yeah Mr Mayor exactly
correct um on a scene call obviously
their job is to get the quickest
aircraft for that scene um and provide
good patient care so obviously we're
Advocates of that but yeah correct
either either one so in a case uh of
what we're facing right now would be the
consideration of both companies uh as an
option so Mr Mayor members Council to
our guests um our our fire chief Gary
Robinson says that it's probably about a
5050 split between between you and Phi
um would you agree that that it's by
50/50 that you make it one or the other
do you think that or do you think
there's a wait one way or the other on
on the number of fights you're doing
versus um probably agree on 5050 like I
said I can't really speak to phi's
numbers but I do know when Phi is not
available in Globe we are that second
call because we are the second closest
aircraft to the CL area
okay I know there's one more helicopter
native air are they in the equation to
or they really not have the availability
to our location I can't speak on behalf
of native air but what I will tell you
um is that native air is an air methods
solution and air methods does not have a
membership solution to offer you yeah so
the answer that in short will be no
yeah uh do we have a cost what it is for
employees only and for residential do we
have so I'm I'm coming up with basically
the number of our employees 139 times
the standard annual rate $45 and we I
know we have some seniors over 60 in
here but about so I'm coming up with
about 6,000 just for internal or yeah
excuse me those prices that I gave you
the the employee rate is $65 that's a
$65 membership for the employees the the
the 45 35 were the upgrade rates oh okay
yes sir
um5 yeah and and excuse me I was get the
numbers that I was going off of was a
head count of 125 of those 125 62 were
non-residents okay so the 62
non-residents at $65 was four uh 4,030
so total with the residents and
non-resident for city employees only
what number do you come up with based on
the5 based on the 12 well um again that
that depends so one if you do just
straight 125 at 65 you're at
8,125 okay that would give all your city
employees the full Banner air membership
across the state that's full okay that's
all across everything that's that's just
a city plan without the MSP uh would
give them all of that coverage across
all the entire State regardless of what
pickup
County okay but there's a lower option
you said and that's where you have to do
the M yes so in and the way I estimate
this and looking looking from the
outside in is we have two options on the
table as far as the MSP and pickup
locations whichever option you were to
choose we would then offer your
nonresident meaning they wouldn't have
any coverage elsewhere because they're
not city of global residents correct so
that cost is
$4,030 and you would tack that on to the
MSP quote whichever one you picked if
you like the hila County option only or
if you prefer the hila County option
with Maricopa panol and Coconino if you
did that option I have these numbers
already um if you go with just the hila
County pickup only it's 31,2 se1 and
that includes your non-resident
employees 31,000 31,2 se1 for just city
employees no sir okay 31 yeah 31,2 se1
is your MSP total po your non-resident
employees okay so roughly
8,125 for employees only 31,2 se1
for Citywide yeah Citywide pickup in
hila County only if you includeed the
adjacent counties that we mentioned and
you cover the non-resident employees
it's 35,6 29 that gives you the
additional Three Counties for pickup so
that gives you an option for because I
know uh people travel a lot U so we
wanted to throw that in there as as an
option for you as well so that's a 50%
cost because it's a 50% chance that we'
get you yeah I I'm not and and I know
Amanda didn't agree to that I don't know
what the exact numbers are I don't know
that I would leave that to somebody who
makes those scene calls you know plus
you got to consider Physicians that are
that are you know hospital-based um
providing aircraft Etc I don't know if
you have somebody that has
that or chief might have that yeah I was
going to say leave it to the
expert squeeze on
it Mr mayor council members um in
looking at that that would that would be
primarily scene calls that we're we're
looking at that when we're dealing when
you're dealing with in facility
transports between that you know we
don't really we don't really see those
numbers uh but in dealing with scene
calls you know the Phi um all both you
know both carriers are our all three
carriers are fairly busy when it comes
to that so we do see a a a regular we've
seen Banner ships on a regular basis
over the course of the last year um as
well as Phi
so so I guess is that number 5 to 10
that you said are those scene calls or
are those inter facility and scene
calls our number a little bit they're
both I think we're doing five ifs out of
C Valley um on a r basis over the month
that's
whatevers no I will say from a hospital
standpoint I'm sure the gentleman from
Phi could say this too you know if
you're a member and you're in the
hospital setting there is an opportunity
to let the ordering physician know that
you do have a membership that's still
not a guarantee uh but at versus a seam
flight so there is that as well where
they can ask for that particular service
if they're available
potention one more question so if uh if
a resident wanted to purchase it they
could do it on their own if we as a city
don't because it's a pretty high cost
when we started looking at all of the
city residents yeah absolutely um $85 is
our household membership um we offer one
year three year five year 10 year
options and then $65 a year for anybody
60 and older so yes that is an option
and that's that's just the heila county
though no that would be a standard
because our our memberships generally
without Citywide coverage are anywhere
we have a banner location your phone by
Banner air so that's a full Banner air
membership okay so we could Advocate
that or advertise that also that 85
bucks is is really cheap having to
instead of paying for a full flight yes
guarantee you
absolutely thank you very much I think
mayor we go for our anybody else
our next thank you very much thank you
for the time we'll make ourselves
available afterwards as well if anybody
has any any questions for us thank you
thank
you this is going to be somewhat of a
review mayor and council members put
some literature
together voted this will be year three
thank
you we're still offering the right $7
per
household I don't want to get too myself
and I have more I will make sure that
that's Pam has one that's the only thing
matters okay
okay thank you actually give that to
ourd
manager so on on the right of your
folder you'll kind of just see a deck
that we put together that kind of shows
what you already know how we operate
different ways different facts and
figures uh towards the back just wanted
to have something that everybody could
kind of look at um we fly similar
aircraft um a lot of other the same
standards so all of that is very good um
our service we uh again we're going to
keep the rate at $7 per household that's
the residents in ela County
we do not have an option at this point
to add any other counties it's not to
say we couldn't but at this point we
don't so uh the cost in your contract is
the one that was signed last year and I
thought it be Prov to have that because
the the price has not changed now Pam
did make mentioned that there was some
household numbers that weren't quite the
same as hers there no problem to to work
that out okay okay
um right here we do everything that we
can to identify an individual as a
member so this little yellow thing here
we have ID cards that we would send that
you probably have seen around town uh we
would make sure I think upwards of 3500
would be sent to the town to be
distributed by me and other means so
that we would make sure literally walk
up and down the street let folks know if
the town decided to do again um that
they have the coverage because often
times we find that different areas we go
some have great knowledge and some have
no idea so we would want to if if you
keep this we would want to do some
advertising at our cost to let folks
know hey this is year number three this
coverage is in effect and if you do
nothing more you're covered inside Gila
County okay and uh one question I feel
that ear from a gentleman that called
was an older gentleman was confused he
thought well most of the hospitals are
going to be somewhere else and I said
that's no problem if as long as you're
flown inside the the county you could be
taken to
wherever as long as it's within range of
one of our aircraft so we have
stickers uh that we can put on the house
the car sir so if the flight originates
out of heila county is what you're
saying then it's covered regardless if
they go to Scottdale or Tucson doesn't
matter absolutely but if the flight
originates outside of the county then we
don't have any way to help them at this
point similarly to what they had
mentioned we do have upgrades which is
this brochure okay uh a person can buy
it for up to 10 years for 300 bucks or
they can do a year at a time for 30 so
you know if the count if the uh Town
renewed and
maybe not next year who knows but your
citizens can buy up to 10 years coverage
at $30 rate which I would definitely you
know look into our standard membership
is
$65 and that covers you anywhere we
offer service so you can do three five
and even 10 years at those rates as well
but these that I brought forward um are
for the MSP or the Citywide coverage so
that's available
uh of course we'll have stickers we'll
do whatever it takes to get the
information out to your residents and U
you know to kind of echo what every what
has been said you know patient rights do
exist when they exist you know if
somebody if if my wife or my daughter is
hurt on the side of the road I just want
them to get help it doesn't really
matter at that time and I think most
everybody that's human would feel the
same uh this is just what I would say
icing on the cake one thing that is
different um from our company is whether
or not you if you have insurance of
course we're going to vill it but we're
not going to charge anybody anything out
of pocket so if a person is
uninjured they supported us in our time
of need we take care of
them and we we find a lot of times that
just the co co-payment and deductible
alone could be pretty pretty solid
Financial headache um
if you're looking at gosh on a very
minute number of
$10,000 each time that helicopter leaves
the community those are dollars that are
leaving glue that could be going to
Public Works that could be going to the
local communi centers whatever to be
being spent at the tire store to put
braces on the kids you know vacation
everything but helicopter because nine
times out of 10 nobody that has been
flone ever thought it would be that day
for them I've come very close multiple
times and sadly it's mostly my own doing
um but I wouldn't be without it um it's
one of those things that for you know I
don't know about you all but if you
drink good coffee or you go through the
drive-thru a couple times you're going
to spend that anyway so it's just better
to have it not need it than to need it
and not have it um
but that's pretty much what we have I'd
be more than happy I brought uh Benny
here he works at our globe base um
that's probably takes just as long to
start and pre-check the aircraft as it
does to fly I think it's 10 nautical
miles from here and then we have deer
Val help me sir uh seven minutes away
and then what other then we got back
four about 25 minutes away out of Mount
Vista and we got got another aircraft
out at oracles about 30 minutes
L which if you can look at it from this
point of view I've spent some time in
Alabama there are counties in Alabama
that have two ground ambulances in the
entire County you have a multitude of
aircraft so if you had a mass casualty
injury situation you could have a fleet
of aircraft rotating people out I would
say the fire department would probably
Echo that being true so it's a great
problem to have
uh in in uh in a lot of areas they're
doing good to even see a helicopter let
alone get a ground ambulance so I mean
you're in a fantastic position as far as
their ambulance coverage is concerned
so
questions mik yes sir and and you guys
fly to all the hospitals in the valley
we take you to definitive care so this
gentleman here and the flight crew if
they feel you need to go to this
hospital this Burn Center disrup Center
then that's where we take
you we're 100% independent company so we
do what we need to do for the
patient and try to keep it extremely
simple I'm a simple person we just like
simple simple's
easy who else has any questions or
concerns so when you said $7 a household
that's what you're charging that's what
our contract is right now correct that's
what it has been the last two years and
what we would extend to you again this
year so what is is a $30 that's the
upgrade M so $7 is just heila County and
you don't do you have a Statewide
project program we do so that's a 30
okay I thought you said you didn't yeah
if if a if the MSP stood and somebody
wanted to buy a membership to be covered
in our 13 state area then we would be
able to do that for an additional $30 or
they could buy it up to 10 years if they
wanted to buy a membership let's say
they're not in in the residence or in
the in the county it's a flat 65
so but they don't have to buy the $300
the 10 year to get the $30 cost right
they can buy it annually no and and it's
absolutely in writing right there so
they can choose one three five or 10 you
know demographics
usually look you know dictate how long a
person wants to do it you know sometimes
you get folks that don't even live in
the county but half the year they just
go ahead and scoop it up get it and pay
it forget it that's an option that they
have
our biggest concern is that folks know
if it's renewed that they have it and
that the opportunity exists to extend
the
coverage whether or not they choose to
do it of course on their on their
uh on their shoulders Banner said they
may do about five to 10 a month do you
guys know how many do a month here in
our area out of this area yeah uh
probably 20 to 30 20 to 30 and those are
SE call or facilities mix facility
calls so Mr Mayor members Council um uh
we had earlier we' gotten a number about
eight um 16 since I think August and two
actually internal um is is what the
numbers that we had had collected
earlier we can't go into much more
detail because it gets into hipa but my
my question would be
the with $7 a household what number do
you come up with I think we're 21,000
for cover that 23 135 23 135 yes that's
for all residents yeah yeah 23 135 would
cover everybody in the city
throughout he look count in the area and
and then are we you internally for just
City staff $50 or $45 a
person we 50 but thank you okay and so
with 125 employees I think it comes out
to um six 600
$6,250 that's where I'm
at um so I've seen air ambulance bills
that are 60 Grand and I think a lot of
times people have no idea that that's
what it costs and um and I know that you
have contracts with like certain health
insurance companies where they negotiate
maybe a better price right but as far as
I know and I'll confirm that we're not
in any contracts we're
strictly okay we're out we're more or
less what you would consider to be out
of network okay which makes that much
more the membership even that much more
valuable okay yeah because I think a lot
of time people are shock how much do
cost well and if you ask the general as
I travel about the area and I've been
across most of our
area 90% of our members become members
after they've been
flown because they didn't know that
there was an opportunity so we want to
take a proactive approach and give
everybody an opportunity which is what I
spend a lot of time doing and I've
actually been stared at quite weird
because I've been walking up and down
the streets in 116° talking to folks
about membership but I mean I've done
this for 20 years I I believe in it the
worst case is you spend the money nobody
benefits from it
fantastic the upside the other side of
that is you have eight or nine people
benefit from it there's a whole lot of
money staying right here in glob not
going to Phoenix not going to some
company not going to some Corporation
but being spent right
here yeah
you it would be devastating somebody
could go bankrupt with a with a bill for
a flight well even if you had your
co-payment and deductible money set
aside I much rather spend it on
something good something fun something
frivolous maybe even I don't know but I
want to keep it in my pocket any way I
can do that to provide that happen I'm
going to do it that's just me Paul do we
have any records of how many do we know
of anybody that's been flown that was
under the insurance do we have a Bing we
we we really can't speak to that
okay P will throw a shoe at me or
something she's done it before then what
our employee copay is for flight HMO or
P what go
ahead well it'd be the remaining
copay the because if if if they have a
copay and a and a a deductible it would
suck up whatever the remaining
deductible so
would zero right but if they didn't have
the if the employees didn't have it it
would take their co-pay and all of their
deductible um if it if it happened early
you know it happened in July it could be
a lot of money if it happens in June
they could have met the
deductible you know you probably find
the longer that you participate
in that's 15 that's sorry I'm sorry oh
no we were talking about the high
deductible what's the what's the the
the on the high
deductible
yeah yeah I think the high deductible
would be the greatest benefit to the
employees I'm sorry interrupt no no no
no problem at all um you'll find that uh
the the more people you'll come in
contact with
that saving a life is priority that's
that's great but I tell people you
remember in the in the early '90s when
cell phones looked more like shoes and
you got the bill and you held it in your
hand and it was like a room of paper and
you kind of gased before you opened it
the real trauma sets in after air
ambulance or any life-threatening
emergency when the bills come in because
nobody is expecting that to happen I had
a sleep study done I about choked so
then there's the three most scary words
you'll hear in in in medical period
whether you're talking about a dentist
or anything is not medically necessary
that's all that has to happen for
anything not to be covered by
insurance and you never know I mean it
just it it depends on so many things I
couldn't even begin to speak to
him so Mr Mayor I I think that where
where I council's that if we're going to
do um if we're going to do for city
employees only we should do both if
we're going to do for City full City we
should probably do both just because of
the random randomness and we don't know
which who's going to show on scene um
based on my back of the napkin math here
we're about
15,000 just for City uh
employees uh and then if we were going
to add in the 54,000 combined for the
City residents um you'd be at
69,000 um total for for both in city
employees and City residents um I think
we're already budgeted for um uh the
about 6,000 7,000 now we we do believe
for the city employees the 15,000 we
could pull it out of the the Blue Cross
Blue Shield retention fund but if we
were going to do the the additional
54,000 that would have to come out of
general fund fund balance and that would
take a hit on our 2.64
million and is that Justa county is that
the upgrade for City that's the low
grade that's so there's not still even
city employees that's not the well no
the city employees would be whatever we
had talked about I know that whatever
Phi is offering now and the
8,125 that's what I'm counting on for um
for the 15,000 for our employees for
upgrade
yeah so and um
so Freddy go ahead um I know we're not
going to make a decision tonight but
could this be a uh one of our uh
committee agenda or committee uh tasks
the um to go over this and yeah yeah we
I think we could we have the our next
meeting is on July 9th I think that we
could um pull off between now and July
9th uh the financial task force and um
and do that and then we
would then we would I would call Tina
and say Tina we well we would probably
make a decision by Council on July 9th
when are you leaving on vacation 12 the
12th
oh so so if we approve a tended budget
we can't raise it we can no would no it
wouldn't be a raise because we would
pull the money out of fund balance the
money is sitting in the retention fund
and the fund balance we Tina would just
do the transfer and adjust the numbers
it doesn't raise the cap it's not
additional spending it's just a
realignment of spending but it would
have to come out
of have out
of your yeah contingency
I the
mayor I just got a quick question
because my address is Miami because I
get my mail from the Miami post office
but I do live within the city limits and
then I know people who don't live in the
city limits but their address is globe
and so how do you guys determine whether
they're actually a globe resident or a
Miami resident or fantastic so as uh Pam
will let you know we have a
roster so we go strictly by that roster
so when she told me the numbers were a
little off it's because she knows and so
everybody that we're going to cover is
going to go on an Excel spreadsheet okay
so now we know exactly who we're
covering and who we're not okay and Mr
Mayor members Council Council Shipley we
we go through jod and and she's able to
produce who's in the city through our
our uh water Billing System to get a
account okay and I think we distribute
through the water bill too um but no we
can we can get a strong count and I go
so you have mailing address you have
property address and and water office
understands that and has a good handle
on that so that roster is provided by
the city Paul you also have residents
city of globe residents that live or in
Arizona Water uh
jurisdiction lots of them yes so how do
you how do you account for those where
where is
Jody well but we still get a we still
get a city of glove utility bill we get
the trash
trash we from does jod count those those
people okay
okay okay John's back they're texting it
right now but Freddy send us all these
high bills from the city
bills not doing chip
in any other questions uh just comments
I know we're not making a decision
tonight Mr
Mayor in my career I was an emergency
manager the best thing you can do is to
assess
risk and then to try to
mitigate the conditions that you might
be dealing with a major
disaster what is it now Mr Mayor 3 years
ago we had a massive fire and a massive
flood and every day through those 6
months we had Danger
in our
creeks in uh high water
flows uh the forest itself surrounded us
and Fire
Flame our risk was
high the actual occurrence of danger to
the public that happened in that time
that's reality was very low surprisingly
low we were very lucky citizens were
literally washed away or or Bridges had
collapsed or people were killed from
burning homes uh from the
fires I have never seen such luck
throughout my career we were very lucky
so when you ask me if I need to mitigate
this into the future of course we have
the reality of what we just went
through it's something you have to
balance on your
budget sometimes you do it a little at a
time so that you maintain high quality
infrastructure or sometimes you just put
a little money aside to be able to
afford these uh uh Services they're not
amenities at the minute they occur
they're
services and so we have to balance the
reality of what we just saw from a few
years ago
versus mitigating that
risk and this is an opportunity to do
that and I advocate this I know as a
council we need to think about about the
rest of our budgets we're going to go
through that tonight but the point is
when you can mitigate and you've seen
recent
history that's a lot of
thought to go to the Future
justification of what we have to do in
this
category I was an emergency manager at
the State of
Arizona uh for 10 years and in our
planning we have a plan a and then all
the way down to plan Z working with
State and FEMA people the point is is
you've you've got to build contingencies
into your emergency
plans and that's the bad day that you
have to pick up the phone
and in my case pick up the phone and
activate every aircraft that the
National Guard
owns uh they're the player of Last
Resort but you use all of your resources
up to that point and I hope that day
never comes but I've seen that bad day
when you need every resource air assets
ground assets to throw basically at
Mother Nature uh so the comment I have I
need to leave you with is we had our
disasters a few years ago we were very
fortunate we did not have many people
injured very fortunate so I I just want
to point out when you can mitigate you
can afford it or budget it that's the
road to go and you hope you never have
to pick up that phone and do that so
I'll leave I'll leave you with that
gentlemen Mr thank you
you well I guess we this uh is going to
really we need more discussion with it
and before any decisions made we really
appreciate both uh companies coming here
and really educating us and letting us
know more about your company and and
costs and everything we we appreciate
that very much appreciate the
opportunity thank you thanks
guys M Council we'll we'll pull together
the the council work group uh Financial
sustainability um before in time uh so
they can uh make a call before we put
the agenda up for the 9th and then we'll
know then and then Pam will be in touch
with both organizations and let them
know the outcome on that good okay and
thank you to Pam for doing the leg work
on this so we go to consent calendar
matters list in the consent calendar are
considered to be routine will be enacted
by one motion and one vote public public
hearing items are designated with the
nastri prior to consideration consent
agenda the mayor will ask whether any
member of the public wishes to remove a
public hearing item for separate
consideration members of the council and
or staff may remove any item for
separate consideration item a
consideration of waiver of section 2-4
d10a prior discussion rule to allow
action on the balance of the consent
Agenda One accounts payable $
52,54 consideration of approval of C
minutes B consideration to approve
the spring bet
tax distribution request for the globe
Downtown Association for the third and
fourth quarter fiscal year 2023 2024 in
the amount of
$1,654 funded from account
1051 51915 general fund Community
organizations glob toown Downtown
Association item C consideration to
approve the spring bed tax distribution
request W for cor Valley Center for the
Arts for the third and fourth quarter of
fiscal year 2023 2024 in the amount of
$1,654 funded from the account 10
5151 920 general fund Community
organization core Valley Center for the
Arts item D consideration to approve the
fall spring spring bed
tax Economic Development Corporation for
the first and second quarters of fiscal
year 2024 for
$2,757 And1 and third and fourth
quarters for fiscal year 2023 2024 for
$2,323 58 for total distributions of
$2,859 funded from account
1051 5191 general fund Community
organization SG EDC and E is
consideration of the donation by the art
Global Organization for the restoration
of the 1930s WPA cement helila Monster
located on the retaining wall in the
intersection of Oak Street and High
Street is there anybody from the public
Council or staff wishing to remove any
of these items for separate
consideration Mr Mayor members Council
um with
nothing no reason to ask for any of
these removed I I would like to remove a
just to if there's any questions on that
I can answer some I know the is not here
I know there was some questions from
staff and and sta has no questions a or
e e e I'm sorry e sorry so Mr Mayor
members Council uh we staff has no
questions on that they have no questions
so this is an approval to move forward
with it as as presented okay good so did
you still want to remove e no I didn't
know if there's any questions there no
questions then I would move to approve
the consent Jenna is presented
second we have motion a second for
approval of the consent agenda is read
is there any further questions or
further
discussion all those in favor say I I
any oppos nay any abstaining motion
passes so new bsom item
5A I'm going to go it's a public hearing
and consideration to approve the new
series 9 Arizona liquor license
application for the Speedway convenience
store located at 1690 East s Street
Globe Arizona 85501 and request to wave
section 24-10 A prior discussion room
Shelly we'll go ahead and open the
public hearing or you want to I'll ince
the item Mr Mayor so this is a new uh
license application for a series 99 uh
license for the Speedway convenience
store located at 1690 East Ash um they
have a current I think series six but
they're wanting to sell spirits and so
this license would cover
that we we posted the liquor license for
the 20 days required and I've heard no
oppositions
okay so I'll go ahead and open the
public hearing if there's any comments
from from the public or if we have
anybody that's here from uh Speedway
online or in in the audience I I believe
we have the uh defiling agent uh
Zoom um and that is um Andrea Andrea are
you on
Zoom I
am so and Andrea is the the filing agent
for the speedway uh application if
there's any questions that Council has
Andrea be happy to to answer
any questions for Andrea not
really okay do you want to add anything
Andrea to that
request oh I'm sorry I think I was
unmute uh no thank you we are as salar
mentioned the store currently has these
Ser 10 be and wi store license and we
like we're not going to change the
operations um just and the um ownership
will remain the same
okay so we go ahead and close the public
hearing and Item B is in another public
hearing consideration to possibly
approve a new application for a series
7 oh
app a request to oh I'm sorry okay I
thought it was on the action
okay so I'd like to make a motion to
approve the uh new series number nine
Arizona Lor license application for the
speedway
convenience store located at 1690 East N
Street glob Arizona
85501 and request to wave section two
second motion second for approval of
item 5A is there any further
discussion all those in favor say I I
you oppose nay abstaining motion passed
so now we can go to Item B another
public hearing and consideration to
possibly approve a new application for a
series 7 Arizon liquor license
application for Upton's Event Center
located at 247 South Broad Street Globe
Arizona 85501 and request to wave
section 2-4-1 A prior discussion room
shall
we Mr Mayor this is a a new application
for a liquor license at the Upton uh
Event Center located at 247 South Broad
Street this is a application for a
series seven it's a beer and wine
license and and um we do have H their
fighting agent uh Lauren Merritt also on
um Zoom if you have any any
questions um I think there was a
question about the location of the
Catholic church and according to Arizona
revised Statute the church restriction
was removed uh two years ago so uh the
restrictions are only for schools school
right
now so and and Lauren um if you're on
online and you can hear us we'll go
ahead and we'll open up okay we'll go
ahead and open the public hearing for
comment okay okay Lauren you're you're
before
councel you have any
questions are you're asking me I'm so
sorry I wasn't sure if you were asking
me I don't have any questions for
Council but I am here if Council has any
questions for
me Fernando just a clarification so the
series 7 is just for like special events
so they have a liquor license so if you
want to have a wedding or reunion or
whatever they don't have to request a
special event permit to to to distribute
alcohol so they'll be able to sell it
and or provide it to whoever rents the
hall okay but so you would be selling it
is that correct you would you wouldn't
like let them just bring alcohol and
serve it or how does that Series 7 work
yes J the series s is a public license
um so it is not just for special events
it is a series 7 dur my bar license so
it would be alcohol that is sold and no
alcohol is never allowed to be brought
to a licensed establishment so uh
individuals would not be able to do that
unless it is a hotel motel Airbnb type
of situation where they are renting a
temporary residence then they're allowed
to bring alcohol to that temporary
residence
okay thank you but for the public area
it is only for
res Chief you have a
comment good evening mayor good evening
Council um apparently I'm a little bit
out of the loop on this particular one
Mr Mayor I excuse me it was my fault
that I did not notify Dale
okay uh it could have been completely my
fault I would have fell in on the sword
of that
one uh
so this so if you can kind of my name is
Dale Walters I'm the chief of police uh
if you could kind of tell me what your
establishment is going to be
doing I am the liquor agent I'm not um I
am not involved with the day-to-day
operations but this is going to be an
event center with a series 7even beer
and wine license so that when they have
events that or have W reception just
like um the individual was saying before
they can provide alcohol at those events
it's a public license so the public is
allowed it's not like a private club the
public is allowed to use the
establishment but it it is not um it's a
license that is always in place and not
just for special events and so this this
location is just if someone could answer
this is next to the church yeah yeah
right next to that house the cathol
church they're not required to get a
special
uh events permit when they're having
events over there
no no there's no longer a restriction
for distance to a church that was remed
in 2022 yeah I'm aware of that I'm
talking about this is more of a question
for the the need of a special event
permit is if they need any city services
if they need barricades if they need uh
extension of premises if if they need
extra security or or anything like
that yeah and I do a lot of special
events with the bars for the Miami Lions
Club so if you're having a function
somewhere and you want to sell alcohol
for a fundraiser for a nonprofit um then
if that establishment does not have a
liquor license already then we would
apply for a special event permit liquor
license from the state which has to be
approved by the governing jurisdiction
which is either the town the City or the
county but it's only for that one event
and and you specify the time frame and
what the purpose is and the money has to
be tied to uh so if I'm selling it's got
the money's got to go to a nonprofit and
so so my concern from my perspective
about is not necessarily the liquor
license it's the Event Center itself uh
it's one thing adding another bar on Old
historic Broad Street it's another thing
putting an event center in there that
might have have nothing for two weeks
but then might have 300 guests on a
Saturday night how do I plan for that so
is there's I guess my question as a
chief of police is is there a mechanism
in place where we get proper
notification and we're able to be able
to plan for that so it's there's traffic
issues there's extra Personnel down
there and things like that so those are
just my concerns but ready go ahead um
so
U maybe you can ask this what is the
normal process in having these
conversations prior to bringing it to
council um with these kinds of requests
and and our police and fire and Public
Works is there is there
a um a meeting that you have in
advance to discuss these things it was
my fault I failed to notify police or
fire so I take it that's a yes there's
that there's typically a meat to discuss
I don't think
we we do it more casually before I don't
think we we usually have special events
but usually we would give them a heads
up that there's something on the agenda
and and that's their opportunity to
discuss um I I get you know that this is
a business oriented type thing but I uh
I would I would ask that that maybe we
we take some time and and have that
conversation with with our uh whoever it
was that that didn't make this but um I
I just would like not like to see that
we step outside of a standard that we've
been doing when it comes to liquor
licenses and things like that um I don't
know if this is an urgent item but I I
really feel like um our police chief and
and maybe our fire or whoever needs to
have this conversation that that
conversation has to be had I I don't
know that this is the platform and the
for the Forum to to just hatch that out
tonight um with all due respect to our
our chief of police um he deserves that
that time I I agree with you Freddy but
they're also asking to weave the rules
so there must be some urgency for this
correct oh the applicants are here or
are the applicants here good okay so
jump up
here Freddy Freddy just a comment on and
I think Fernando stated it is I know
when I apply for the liquor license for
an event at the church in Miami I have
to go to the town of Miami Council I
have to get I have to get approval from
their governing body before I could even
apply for a Lo license and in this case
they don't they're saying they don't
have to but maybe a notification that
you're having an event you know so our
police staff can we uh we had to apply
for the
uh sorry we had to apply for the license
to run a business there and we did that
properly uh we went down there we paid
for everything uh uh before we got the
license we had to get okayed from a
building we had to get okayed from
public works and we had to get okay from
fire we uh took an additional 12 months
to get okay with
fire we had to put in a suppression
system throughout the entire building
cost us close to
$100,000 we uh would like to start
making up for that money and we have a
lot of debt and we have things that are
we have events we've been kind of
advertising a little bit and we have
events that want to go in there this
next month so we would like to move
this and we can work with police let me
help you
okay I think we need to have a special
event center here in the in the
community we do I think approving the
liquor license tonight is probably the
right thing to do the only thing I ask
is if we were to partner we need to put
some type of notification mechanism in
place so we're able to manage that as we
move
forward that's all Fernando um because I
do a lot of these um there really isn't
another venue that has a liquor license
to like to do this because now the it
doesn't put it on the people that are
trying to put on the event to try to
figure out how to get alcohol to that to
that venue
and so like if you think of all the
places that we have venues you have to
do a special event for any time you want
to sell alcohol and and if you want to
bring alcohol to those vents you have to
provide proof that you have insurance
that you're covered for that purpose you
have to have somebody run the bar to
make sure no wonder so having a venue
like that that's already has a liquor
license would be a huge benefit to the
community as a whole
I agree with everything council member
shiple just said but we do need to keep
in mind that if somebody in the cinetta
family got married there I don't know if
I have enough Cops full
time to be all C there has to be a
mechanism in place that we can get a
heads up on it and prepare for that and
Mr Mayor members Council there's a
series of text flying back and forth
between about four staff members and
Shel and I uh and I think we have a
framework for a process that that this
won't slip through the cracks and and I
won't miss this again Mike go ahead what
is the capacity of your event
center uh 332 people standing but we
have aund we have about 180 chairs right
now um but we have a sign posted for 332
people Max personnel's inside and that
that meets our requirements as far as
fire and
we went through all the different stuff
over 12
months 12 months the only the only
person I didn't talk to was
police sorry police you have to
understand I'm
adopted uh like I said that wouldn't
take up just the brides family so like
every other event here uh there are
exceptions where we can do uh extensions
of premises and things like that I hope
there we need something like like this
in our community I completely agree with
that I'm fine with a liquor license
that's much easier in the long run for
everybody involved however it's just a
mechanism of notification so we can
properly support it uh as we move
forward so that's all I ask thank you
may thank you Council sorry Paul Freddy
go ahead yeah so I I just wanted to give
our our police chief um an opportunity
to to clear this uh as as you know he
was caught off guard as he said and I
firmly agree that you know your business
venture is is is valuable thank you okay
and I'm not trying to take away from it
I just want to make sure that there is
complete um
um just a good working relationship with
not just the people that you have dealt
with already in the city but more
importantly or most importantly our
police because you know they're going to
be tasked with having to uh maintain the
Peace So that that's all I was going at
that just looking for transparency
that's all yes we
yes I don't want to get too far off the
so does that have a kitchen in it too or
just you're just going to sell alcohol
and and have events here so we have a uh
like a prep station in the back with a
three-stage sink a a hand washing sink
and a vegetable sink it's not considered
a kitchen because there's no cooking in
there um but there's refrigerators and
there's a two nice restrooms adaa
approved and a whole nine yards and yeah
okay very good I'm glad you complied
because you know um as a city you know
we we want to make sure that our
businesses are safe and and their
patrons um and so I applaud you for all
the efforts you've made thank you thank
you I want to see Globe keep growing and
going up and so do we yes so the same
page thank you thank you very much thank
you
you we have a motion you need to close
the special you have to close it sorry
any other
comments we go ahead and close the
public hearing May if there no other
questions or comments I move to approve
item 5 b as stated and wave section
2-4 discussion second motion second for
approval of item 5B is there any further
discussion all those in favor say I I
any opposing nay any abstaining motion
pass thank you
J so we go to action item then we have
on action item item a consideration to
approve the adoption of the City of Gold
fiscal year 2024 2025 tentative budget
in the amount not to exceed 66
m300 245
which includes $19 million in unfunded
Grant request and direction to make
possible adjustments within the budget
and announce the public hearing date of
July 16 2024 for the adoption of the
final budget and July 30th 2024 for the
adoption of the proper property tax
levy Mr Mayor members
[Applause]
Council so we we're here to um consider
the the tenative budget like I said it's
a um been been a labor of trying to get
this together it's come together very
well I wanted to quickly go through the
um uh a review of some of the um
additions uh that we've added since I
think we last talked that are kind of
key additions and so um on the budget
updates uh we did a market study used by
directors addressing retention
attractions obession planning and
employee Equity um that includes uh
$367,900 in additional Department
employee funding there may be an
adjustment about within 20,000 on there
depending as we we hammer out the last
little bit of uh Public Works budgeting
and make sure so I wanted to put that
cave out of about 20,000 um this
includes also
140,00 in Department CIP requests and uh
all employees from directors on down
will include a 2.5 Merit increase um
this year and we plan to keep that Merit
increase keeping the Merit increase in
place Keeps Us less likely less and less
likely to have to do Market adjustments
it keeps us in the market if the market
cools just a bit we should be right on
track go
ahead um highlights we'll be creating a
battalion chief position currently
posted uh we're increasing officer pay
uh starting officer pay to 57 924 so
roughly 58,000 Public Works uh
increasing starting pay to 1551 an hour
uh administratively we'll be creating an
assistant City management position to be
posted uh for internal applicants uh
we'll create a development services
director position to be posted for
internal applicants and create a
building inspector position to be posted
for both internal and external
applicants go
ahead um highlights of budget add-ons
General Thun um City prosecutor and we
will be adding
18,000 uh to allow um staff to have
someone rely on and to actually present
the cases to the city magistrate um CVS
building this is general fund um and I
think it'll it'll help uh support um our
efforts to uh make sure that we we do
proper service to um our process and
building and cod enforcement making sure
we're uh we're carrying that forward
properly is that going to be a as a
needed position the the city prosecutor
yeah yeah it'll be cases that I mean I
think there's some cases that are pretty
simple and then there's some mainly com
uh commercial code is probably the one
that's going to be the that that we will
definitely use that I think residential
code I I think some of those are pretty
pretty simple and then there are a
couple a few every year that the police
use um for uh civil traffic okay um CVS
Building Maintenance like I say uh we
youd look at a fire escape and um
refreshing the wood on the front um but
mayor we will also talk about the I I
think with the rain we got a good
gushing on the the awnings but they're
still looking faded so we'll talk about
the faded awnings and the um the heavy
duty uh tinting on the windows that make
it look closed I that one so um fire
station set aside because we are um in
the process of trying to line up
long-term funding to build our new fire
station um we have uh put in 200,000
this year even though we we probably
will not have a funding lined up this
year we wanted to start parking some
money uh and show that we can carry the
The Debt Service when we do go go out
for loans and and need to pay those off
of General funds um Michaelson building
match funds we have
750,000 we need to oh okay we need to um
700 we have 750,000 grant that we need
Supply
$150,000 partially a match and maybe a
little bit more that we're sharing with
the county uh but County's been our
great partner in that and we're working
together to get that um up and up and
going it's a we should have an update
presentation very soon on that one
because it's a we're we're we're back on
on track with that um General Plan
update it's almost 10 years since um
city of globe did their General plan I
think it was award-winning General plan
done by Zubia group and um uh we need to
do a update on that and that's a big
public process it's chance for everybody
to chime in on where we're going and and
it helps us it's a the perfect timing I
think on that but it is it does take
some funding to get that General plan
put together um architect for City
design we had um
Community Development block grant
discussions we did not pick um there one
of the options was some upgrades at City
Hall um we did not pick that one I think
one of the reasons we we didn't have
good price to exactly what that was and
so that's a little bit of money so we
can go in there and um uh set up a
design and get some pricing and when we
come back in in a year or you find other
funding we know exactly what we're
asking for to to improve city hall and
what the pricing would
be Fredy uh thank you uh Paul the the
architect or this item that we're
talking about does that also include
engineering um I don't believe so I I
think um it depends on the architect we
use and how complex it is um I know we
would have to we would we would use
engineered plans and and I know some
Architects do have engineer stamps it
dep um so okay so it's a good question
but um I I will I think the I think what
you're getting at is yes we too are
required to have stamp plans either
engineer or architect well I'm just
think you know it'd be a great deal if
we could have it designed and engineered
yes and now you know the next step would
be much simpler yeah no yeah I think um
that that would be the path we would
look down so but we like I say it's just
m mainly the doors and some area in the
front water office so it's not a real
complex it's not like building the
second floor
which we can do one of these we'll save
that for a year so but to get out of the
flood
zone have a question CS building and
build everything here so the architect
for City design just out of curiosity uh
if I was planning to do something with
my
building it was said to be that I have
to have an engineered yes stamped
drawing is that correct and that price
varies per project correct the so
because I've been told anywhere from 750
bucks all the way up to
$7,000 I I think I think the question to
just curious Mr ran Freddy is if we were
doing upgrades as we talked about we
would need stamped or engineered plans
to do that in City
Hall yes go ahead
and and maybe just talk about the
threshold and when that's I'm not I
don't think I could find an example when
it wasn't
required I think I think only if it was
residential and you weren't moving go
ahead so good evening Mr Mayor City
Council Members my understanding of the
question is when that rule
applies uh councilmen is for seal set of
plans so our commercial project Comm
commercial projects uh depending on the
scope of work that rule does always
apply
and it does for residential as well
depending on the nature of the work
being done again it's the scope of the
work that is being
conducted it can be waved based on the
information that comes to the building
official and based on the scope and the
nature of work it Mr mayor memb council
um uh Tony it can only be waved in the
commercial in a residential setting
where the
owner says that he will continue to live
in that house for over a year yeah so
you have owner Builder um procul it's
ARS rule uh it's a one-ear
rule if you're going to live in it or
possess it for one year or longer then
you can do that work oner Builder
doesn't need to be stamps at of plans uh
by an engineer uh it doesn't
excuse
the possibility of requiring a
stamped design professional still so
again just uh that one year doesn't
matter it's the engineering that's the
difference so you have a stamped set by
an architect and then you have a stamp
sealed set by a PE an
engineer the two differences so again
depending on the scope and major the pro
uh project and then also um whether it's
residential or commercial and then also
depending back to the building
official's
approval goes back to the scope and
nature of the project and then it also
uh there's a determination
on um what we are talking about here as
well so is it structural is it just uh
non structural is it Appliance driven is
it there's a lot of factors there and
then fire department uh through the IFC
has different requirements as well um
pretty much the same across the board uh
but there may be some different um UL
requirements or listing requirements
that come along with depending what
we're talking about this is a broad
statement so depending what we're
talking about
so yeah so mayor council members when
you know primarily especially when we're
dealing with with systems if we're
dealing with systems related to fire
suppression when we're dealing with
systems related to anything like that
ventilation requirements and stuff those
do require the the stamp set of plans to
accompany it to to ensure that it meets
the requirements of of whatever location
facility uh that it's being installed
in have these always been in place or
would
it stamp drawings has this been a
requirement for that has been a that has
been a a requirement as uh within the
code yes
okay mayor thank you thank
you and if I can just add to that that
that was required so not only uh IFC but
uh the iodes as
well thank you thank
you so the um uh Enterprise fund we uh
some of the highlights there we will be
hiring a a water attorney um we're very
getting like say effluent and in
negotiations with some of our partners
is on the horizon and so we want to have
a little bit of money so we can retain
and and consult with uh an attorney on
water and um eff uh negotiations cost uh
rates um uh credits I think the the
credit part is the the part that is the
the most used but complicated so um and
then the the Jed truck um we have
600,000 there uh for the jeder truck we
did receive a um 100
116,000 in the payoff from the previous
jedar truck
um that is no longer with
us but we um it's a key component uh
used by public works by sewer uh to keep
the sewers uh clean and flowing um it's
the a has a spray head that reaches 500
ft uh in any direction and I think a
vacuum does wonderful things to make
sure that everybody's sewers are working
properly it's tough without having one
uh inh house we have to go and rent one
for 3 to 5,000 every time we need it uh
we're we're not as quick to to rent one
so so purchasing this out of water um
Enterprise fund sewer uh is I think a a
really important purchase so uh we we're
we need to have that truck we're kind of
going backwards and we're just going to
be paying rental fee after rental fee
May so what we went through this whole
budget like last week but I forgot to
ask will the Jetter have truck have a
camera so that you can scope the lines
and see what you're actually dealing
with mayor and Council to answer your
question yes there's additional add-ons
we can do we actually have a camera van
that we utilize for some minor stuff and
then we have the rolling portable
cameras so there's different versions of
that it kind of goes into our future
plan as far as scoping jetting all our
lines that we're going to be cameraing
this line so yes
okay now we you have a budget we must
stay within
so yeah you want to be able to see
it well we have a I think there's an
iPhone
attachment oh cool so has a question
yeah that that can be added on later
right it doesn't have to be um with the
truck as we purchase it or or or
not with mayor and council with to
answer your question yes with the
anticipation of adding on you know we
can always get it you know it's just
like any other project you can get it
ready for add-ons which like Paul says
we have a budget so the the model that
we saw had the bells and whistles we've
scaled that down it's kind of above what
we had but there's there those types of
things could be added on you know we
we'll definitely stay within budget so M
mayor members Council John would would a
camera on the end of that be useful oh
yes yes it always is but once you're
once you're actually running that
pressure that reel through there you're
not going to have it a camera on that
because it's doing all the work and
you're going to D you could damage
camera but like I said there's different
methods of having the cameras the
Portables to our camera van that we're
utilizing that now so that's why the
jedar truck is key to actually once
we're cleaning the lines and inspecting
so it's just part of a whole another
process and then get a couple extra sets
of chalks on it so so yeah more than
that
yes thanks John all right and um so
going on um so that's the our add-ons
the next steps coming up um tonight
we're um if Council so pleases we'll
hopefully be adopting the tenative
budget um at this regular council
meeting um after this Shelly will will
publish the tenative budget documents
and the final budget notice on the um
for the 3rd and the 10th at the silver
belt um July 16th and and we that is a
Tuesday uh we will be holding a special
council meeting um for final adoption of
the of the budget um 6 PM it's off the
cycle but because we have to post for
two weeks and because of the the time
frame we can't get the postings
happening we need three weeks between
meetings to get the postings for two
weeks so that's why we're pushing that
out to the 16th and then July 30th then
we can get our adoption of the property
tax rate uh special council meeting we
can do it 230 I think we are lowering
that by a smidge yes yeah so we're
actually and and remember the the the
property tax rate is the the valuations
times rate equals a levy um and to keep
the levy the same as we promised and
done year after year after year um we
will actually take it down a fraction um
but there's no the only increases in the
property tax uh collection is from new
construction and Mr Mayor that's all I
have if there's any questions before we
go to the actual run through of the
budget
so I got two things um one is did we get
the Workforce Development budgeted into
the budget
funds I let me double check on that we
can if we didn't we will make sure we
have that as an add-on because when we
were at the leagues of cities and towns
they made it clear that the federal
government is going to be looking to
make Workforce Development funding
available but we would only be able to
spend that money if we have a budget
line item for it so I want to even if we
never get any of that money I'd like to
see it budgeted so that we can spend it
which is the second point that I want to
make is we we are not going to spend $66
million but cities cannot spend money
that they don't budget and so if we
don't budget for it even if we never
spend it we can't spend it even if we
have the money and so we have to kind of
over budget on several things so that
way if something happens we're flexible
enough to be able to react to it and or
accept money to be able to do something
that we want to do and so um just want
you guys to know that we're not going to
spend $66 million on our budget but that
is the budget so that no we can we can
make sure that we meet that technical
requirement so we're available for those
those grants with the 19 million
unfunded Grant uh amount be part of that
or yeah and we will get when we get to
the grant page I think we can do that
what was your other question that was
two no that was two that was two that so
one point was to make sure people
understand that our budget is we have to
do that so that we can spend the money
if we need to because we are not allowed
to spend money that's not budgeted right
and so we have to think ahead and then
the other was to make sure we do put
budget line item for Workforce
Development because I'd hate to leave
money on a table because we forgot to
put it in Dam bu no thank you for making
checking on that we will double check
okay so with M Mr May councel with that
I'd like to invite I have a question on
your highlights on when you talk uh with
a battalion chief uh position uh you
don't uh you didn't put whether it's
going to be posted internal external it
has been posted both internal and ex
it's been posted external internal both
and is that a permanent position or a
temporary position we would call that an
over hire position so through a whole
series of it it's we've seen that
succession planning is really really
important so right now we we are looking
at that position as getting someone in
place in order to possibly move up as we
have movement in the deputy chief and
the fire chief um and so I do not in the
time that that takes I don't have a
timeline um as those things happen um
but I I I don't think that we've had the
discussion right now that that a a
battalion chief is necessary given the
the single station and the scope of our
department um but there's there's pros
and cons on that but right now when as I
budget for that my anticipation I I
would call that a over hire
position thank you okay and T do you
want to do from the table or I was going
to do it from the table but there's not
a microphone at the table so I realized
that that and and I don't think I want
to hand old one because no I think Danny
would it pick it
up
you you know Carmen came up here and she
she has some vot location that was
impressive but I I would just I'm just
going to do it from here I think I'll be
I think I can see the slides here and if
uh shell will just move them along for
me I think I'll do okay but thank you
thank you for the opportunity uh Mr
Mayor members of council thank you again
for uh allowing me to um represent Pat
Walker consultant and be here to help
you put together your fiscal year 2024
2025 budget um I'm going to go through
the slide you've heard the city
manager's com uh comments I'm going to
just do the budget presentation and this
and then we'll have questions if if you
have any really specific questions I
will go to my laptop if I if there's
something that you really need me to
look up
um if I talk too fast feel free to slow
me down I get kind of nervous and start
reading through numbers quite quickly so
if you need me to just slow down a
little feel
free I'm sorry that's okay did I miss
the manager comments well you cleared
the RO were you gon to make more manager
comments I thought that was your slide
presentation go for it I'm sorry we have
the budget and everybody leaves listen
you know that's not a bad thing
um no and and like I said the um um this
this budget being put together was put
together with um uh repeated meetings
with departments and both in the
operational uh the capital and in the um
in the Staffing um we are using modest
projections um as we have and uh because
we we know that that's a better thing
that it's safer all I I had a finance
director once tell me there's
conservative Finance directors and
there's unemployed Finance directors and
so with Pat Walker um she falls in that
conservative
um incl in uh conservative group um we I
think Tina you are going to talk about
the hit from the state on the on the
state shairs um and and I will tell you
that um the biggest change that we're
going to make in doing this budget and
implementing this budget is make sure
that that we go after and make sure that
we are collecting what is owed to the
city what is due to the city uh we have
grants that we have to make sure that
we're following up and getting our
reimbursements we're we're bringing that
in uh make sure that that that everyone
is is um uh that development is paying
for itself and that that fees are not uh
uh levied unfairly or in inconsistently
and so that is one of the Prime uh
focuses for finance staff that that we
up our game and making sure that we
treat everybody fair and make sure that
we uh go after what we we need to not
leave money on the table that was my
comments that includes TPT taxes yes it
does okay so if I hit this Shelly will
it advance or do you want me to tell you
that was that me or you that's you that
was me great okay so I'm gonna follow
the same format that I did last year you
will see mostly the same slides with the
updated numbers this is the big picture
revenues by fund each of your major
funds um I won't go into too much detail
on this slide because I will cover the
general funds uh revenues separately and
I will mostly be comparing the adopted
budget to the proposed budget so I've
highlighted those columns in yellow so
that they stand out I will occasionally
also be discussing what's the estimated
fiscal year 24 if that is uh having an
impact on the decision that we're making
for fiscal year 25 overall the growth is
1 27 million that's the 65.3 to the 66.6
that's just slightly hid there um but I
will again go over each of these as I
cover each one of the funds separately
again this is the revenue budget this is
the big pictures expenditures so all the
numbers look the same because our
revenues match our expenditures and you
will see on here I want to just address
briefly that you'll see that total of 66
m606 237 at the bottom but you're
adopting a budget of 66
m324 and that is because your transfers
when you transfer money to the general
fund it shows up on the general fund
expenditure line but then when the
library and active adult spend it that's
when it's really your expenditure you
don't take a hit twice that's eliminated
out of your expenditure budget because
of home rule you you guys aren't as
tyght but certainly in cities and towns
where what your expenditure limit it's
very important that you get those
transfer eliminated out so I just showed
that at the very bottom as a negative so
you understand that you're adopting an
expenditure budget and your uh transfers
in between two funds don't get counted
um none of the budgets right now are
projected to be over by funds so
everything in the estimated column is
less than the adopted column um which is
great that's how we want to see our
budgets at the end of the year
individual departments in the general
fund may need budget adjustments because
of some things we we budgeted the PS
sprs payment in Council but it found out
later it really has to hit fire and
police so there will still be some
budget adjustments as you go through
audit prep and finish your your end of
year there's still adjustments that you
make between those funds but by uh
between those departments but by fund
everything is within uh its adopted
budget for the
forecast um the largest savings that
you'll see are either contingencies held
in reserve in the general fund so that's
why when you see your estimated 16.4
million to be spent in the general fund
where you adopted an $18 million budget
that's because your $2.9 million fund
balance was in there as a contingency so
you weren't expecting to spend that fund
you weren't wanting to spend that money
um uh this is your not to exceed
proposed budget number um and as you
mentioned mayor you set the limit now
and you doesn't mean you're going to
spend it you know councilman Shipley you
mentioned that it's not it's not the
budget you're going to spend it's the
capacity and so that if someone comes
along and gives you a huge Grant you
want to have the ability to make
decisions with that uh as Paul stated to
develop the expenditures for this coming
year I did meet with individual
departments as long as as far back as
January I think Rael at the library was
my first meeting at the end of January I
met with the chief of police and uh fire
both at the end of February I've had
several meetings with public works and
their project team so I feel like we've
had a lot of good input on this budget
and the Departments have had had a real
opportunity to tell me what's their
carryover what's been finished what
needs to be accounted for in the coming
budget and Mr may members Council I
don't mean to interrup Tina but um we
did a we did a primary run through of
department needs on operations um
sometimes when we get in the budget
budget crunch we'll have to go back and
and kind of take a little bit more off
and tighten those numbers um our our
staff is very good about only asking for
what they what they really need in
operations and we accepted that and
never went back and and um trimmed that
or made any adjustments unless we
requested to and I don't think we did
that much trimming at all so that's
always a good thing when we can just
take it as it's first laid out that's
really their
need no I liked what you said earlier
that that your budget's a road map but
there's times where you recalculate your
route so that that can still happen but
that's what council is for and you did
some of that during the year there were
a few budget adjustments that came to
council during the year so and I'll I'll
try and address those when you see
them okay the uh general fund revenues
we'll talk a little bit more in detail
um as far as taxes the property tax levy
I'll talk about in the next slide but
the remaining taxes are up about a
million dollars um over the adopted
budget or about 11% what this tells me
is that when we did the 4 Revenue budget
we were very conservative we were hoping
for these revenues to see these revenues
but we weren't budgeting every dollar at
that point and that was
um you know it's a good place to be it's
a good place to be um now we are
budgeting a 1 and a half% growth over
the current budgeted Revenue so the 10
million 68 is um about a 1 and a half%
growth on the sales tax this is the city
sales tax um this is feels a little bit
more aggressive but as Paul mentioned
the city's goal is to not leave any
funding on the table and ensure that the
residents and businesses and visitors
are paying their fair share so uh we're
still comfortable with this this amount
of growth licenses and permits are a
flat number from the same from last
year's budget um but again we're
planning on improvements in the
development services department to
continue to improve these
revenues intergovernmental um is what
Paul mentioned is the state shared sales
tax TPT vehicle license and urban
Revenue sharings these are based on the
League's estimates that we got as late
as May um these are down
$44,000 over the fiscal year 24 adopted
budget these um are also still
anticipated to go down again in fiscal
year 26 and we won't start to see growth
again until fiscal year 27 so again we
will be monitoring these seeing how
these are actually coming in and then
recalculating route if that you know is
what has to happen down the road in the
future
franchise fees are up about $57,000 and
that's based on the projections for this
year and again improved collection
efforts from the development services
department charges for services are up
about 455,000 and that is what Paul
talked about we are we are capturing the
revenue from the uh SRO officers from
hila County we didn't have that budgeted
we had one officer budgeted last year
we've got three budgeted this year um as
well as getting uh collect on some old
Haida and gum and Dima grants so the
finance department really has been
working diligently this year to collect
on some past revenues as well as improve
this revenue forecast for fiscal year
25 findes and forfeitures we just kept
that flat at 113,000 the estimates 124
but again that's a that's just not the
kind of Revenue you build your whole
Budget on you just don't know what your
fines and your forfeitures are going to
be miscellaneous interest and re
miscellaneous revenues includes interest
um they are up slightly but that is due
in part to that's where we've um booked
the the retention funding that we're
getting from Blue Cross Blue Shield to
um help kind of buy down our our health
care costs so we had to show that
somewhere in the budget as a revenue and
so that's part of the reason that that
went up and then there's a small budget
for contributions you know the mines are
very generous to the city and other
donors as well and so you just have
usually some some amount of voluntary
cont contributions and donations that
you can plan on to happen on a regular
basis um so that brings your general
fund revenues at 19 million 569
256 I will just go briefly over the
property tax levy you this is what you
will be making a decision on
on what did we say July 30th I think
July 30th is the date again this is a
flat Levy so in order to not have to do
a truth in taxation here hearing to tell
the voters and not just tell the voters
but really have the truth be that you
are not raising their taxes you have to
assess the same levy on the same
property as the year before and to do
that we had to drop the rate from 1.
12255 to 1.
12221 which means on all the property
last year if you applied that rate you
would get the same
5383 128 that is your current year
property tax levy the growth that you'll
see in new property is that $ 35,0
$359 which is that new rate applied to
new construction so your total Levy
without any truth in taxation hearing is
54193 so that's the levy and the rate
that you will be adopting in at the end
of
July um
it now I'll go through just the general
fund by department and again this is the
area where you will see that
you know admin uh let's see so police
and fire you had a budget and the
estimates are higher and I'll go through
each of those Council dropped by um
600,000 because previously the psprs
payment was budgeted in Council and
that's not where it's going to occur so
we didn't put that in the budget there
in 25 um there is actually an increase
of about 89,000 in the Council budget
once you take that 600,000 out and that
is due in part to half a year of the new
Council pay increases which will take a
effect in January of 25 as well as the
Blue Cross Blue Shield Wellness fund
which you've talked about these scans
and and those uh and that's a separate
fund that Blue Cross Blue Shields we
have the revenue posted for it and the
matching expense here is councel and the
reimbursement of the gym fees and there
was an increase to that um there are
also some additional audits this year we
were behind so we'll be paying for two
audits this
year um the community groups and bed tax
we just dropped the expectation a little
based on the current projections it was
250,000 in the adopted budget the
estimates only about 202 maybe even a
little less than that um because we're
still waiting for those revenues to show
up at you know at the end of the year so
we've just dropped it to 225 and I know
that council is still looking at the
administration of this program and how
those dollars are going to be
distributed but again that's one where
you have the tax when the tax comes in
you make the decision how to spend the
money so they're they're a matching set
on the bit tax you're saying 2 25 for
the proposed budget what if it does
exceed that and go to
250 in that fiscal year okay well this
will kind of address what um councilman
Shipley was talking about and and your
concerns are you have that when you get
down to your contingency in the general
fund you have 2.6 that's money you don't
ever intend to spend because it's your
fund balance so if you have a new
Revenue that comes in you can drop your
contingency and put and move that
contingency to an expenditure line this
this one any place else and it's not
affecting your fund balance because what
you you've got some unrealized Revenue
so the next year your fund balance stays
the same but you that that's why
appropriating your fund balance it's
really giving you that capacity so you
would be able to do those adjustments
and Mr Mayor members Council so so Tina
on the do you cover the expenditure side
and I mean we we basically just
for bed tax so um we we're we're not
doing a distribution or a split or
anything like that because we're not
going to have the bed Tax Solution uh
adopted and so we in the in the actual
budget line item you just have one
Community Revenue expense so for now in
the tentative budget and probably also
the final budget you'll just see one
line I'm not going to to Define what
each of those five agencies is going to
receive because you haven't made that
decision yet so and and I don't think
we're projecting that it will
um yeah you just never know which way
it's going to hit hopefully it goes
higher thank you um Administration
budget is reduced by
156,000 518 which is in part the
reduction of the fund balance
contingency from 2.9 to
2.66 which we've talked about um with
those capital projects that you put into
the budget as well as did actually make
an a a decision during this fiscal year
to move 45,000 F fund balance to a pivot
a I I'll talk about the fire no is it
pivot a it was pivot okay but it's I've
got a note for that in fire so um and
additionally one of the things I did
last year which I know better now is
that I in the administrative budget I
had put all the Merit raises for all of
the general fund departments just kind
of as a $140,000 line item there I
didn't do that years they're spread
appropriately throughout each department
so that also caused the administration
budget to come down um and and some of
the contracts and cond uh Consultants
were reduced a little as the decision
was made to share some of these expenses
with the Enterprise fund this is
appropriate so you have some procurement
and finance people that you know doesn't
the general fund doesn't have to carry
the whole burden of that because they
are providing benefit to your Enterprise
funds as well the fire uh department is
up a million 31,000 and again some of
the city managers uh the city managers
covered this with the new battalion
chief position um increase rates for the
Medics that was done last year um there
were some Market adjustments Equity
retention succession planning that he
mentioned uh added as well um
422,000 of that is the estimated psprs
collection for this year that would be
the unfunded liability payment for next
year so again out of council half in
fire half in police
um the important um this is this is
important to do this and you you've made
this decision because the psprs rate
went from 42% to 47% this year for the
tier one employees so it's super
important that we're making those
payments on that unfunded liability um
and again there's 28,000 of approved
Capital purchases for harnesses vent fan
and fire hose that Council recommended
from the fund balance so those are some
of the CIP items that you put in police
is also up a million million 50,000
similar to fire some of the same reasons
the pspr payment is in police now they
also received 27,800 in capital
purchases for training gear drone
evidence storage building which I know
what that is now um kept saying what do
evidence conects you know so that's
mostly knew what accounting code to put
it in uh the similarly the psprs rates
went from 41% to 46% so that was about
$18,000 increase just in in retirement
benefits um as well as the significant
market and Equity adjustments that were
made to improve retention in that
department and I think Paul has
discussed that that the police made the
decision to give up two FTE to help fund
some of those you'll see that when I go
through the the employee list schedule
um the magistrate Department increased
by about 10,000 which oddly enough is
actually due to a change in health plans
for one of the employees it's kind of an
interesting thing that can make that big
of a difference in a very small
Department um public works here is
actually in the general fund down
98,000 but it is due to some right
sizing you'll see again on the FTE that
some people some positions have moved
from general fund uh Public Works to
water because of the nature of the
position so some of that was some
savings put over there they are funded
for 44 positions overall and they also
received 26,000 in capital funding for
cement mixers GIS licenses and software
and new basketball backboards for the
parks so um they may also have some
changes tentative to final so you might
see a few changes that he was still
talking about for some Merit and Equity
um and bringing the minimum wage uh
workers up a little the museum is up
about
$105,000 that is really the completion
of the B bagawa renovation so it's it's
some old grant money that's appropriated
in there as well as a match for the
current grant that they've got economic
development is up by 424,000 but that
includes some of the things Paul talked
about the city PL General Plan update um
the new building inspector position
150,000 in match funding for the
Michaelson building is in Economic
Development Department and between um
between tenative and final we will
probably move that new that assistant
city manager position out of Economic
Development and up into admin so that'll
be a tentative to change it won't have
an impact on the budget
overall the budget for the pool is down
because the construction work is
completed and any payments that may
still be made will ACR to 2024 to fiscal
year 2024 this is the first year of
really looking at a full budget with our
own lifeguard staff um so really seeing
how the rental and the admissions are
working and the revenues look like
there's still a lot to be watched um in
terms of managing that pool Bud budget
and Fleet is up only about 12,500 and
you know a quarter of that is just
increased salaries and the rest is
mostly increased vehicle and equipment
maintenance which is what you would
expect in a fleet department so I do uh
remind you that all of these budgets now
do include that 2 and a half% merit
increase um that is will be applied as
evaluations are done during the
year so this is the fun one talking
about FTE because it's always weird when
you full-time equivalent that's what an
FTE is most of the time that Mak sense
um but when we get to the pool it gets a
little weird so uh like last year it
doesn't include the seven members of
council um your fire reserves your your
your volunteer fire and your Reserve
fire and your three fire pension
positions so this is Apples to Apples to
what I presented last year
Administration added a payroll Clerk
midye and then um but that's the only
change that they had last year except
that I told you from tentative to final
we will move a position from economic
development to admin um fire during the
year increase the part-time Fire
Marshall position to full-time midye and
then you have the battalion chief that's
being added so that's the change
bringing them to
19 police actually increased by three
positions midy year because two of those
were those additional SRO officers that
we didn't have in the budget at the
beginning of the year so that's two of
the three that were added midye the
third one is an overhire for succession
planning So eventually that one should
drop off um and then as I said going
from 24 to 25 they have voluntarily
decreased two positions in order to
increase base pay and improve the
retention of the current staff and Mr
Mayor members Council just just a
reminder that um in police the the SRO
are fully funded for three years this is
the second year of that the three of
them are fully funded um uh by the by
the district um the the um I think the
Gom is 75% 25% High to I think about
almost about 50/50 it's a little bit
lower and what am I missing I think
that's there's a Dima a new Dima Grant I
believe oh yeah that there's some some
funding for about a third of a couple
positions there so so there a lot of
that the those positions are uh do have
outside funding D reminds me of
often so Public Works um you'll see
three positions mid year again two of
those were
two of those were positions that moved
to water and the other one position was
actually mid year they dropped two
positions to create one new position so
that was one of the minus ones that
happened mid year and then uh from 24 to
25 that minus one also is a position
move to water so when you see the next
slide you'll see that Public Works had
45 last year and still has 44 going into
this year the only real difference being
that they combined two to create one
during the year here um again pool's
kind of an anomaly I I'll go through
this and kind of explain it you have you
know originally when we started planning
to have our own lifeguards and not have
contracted staff we thought we'd have
two full-time and 13 halim so that's 13
halftime is six and a half fdes plus the
two so as the budget was being developed
they're like oh no it's going to take a
lot more people than that we're probably
gonna have 16 halftime employees so I
went to 10 reality is I think there's 24
of them out there and they're probably
working a quarter of a time and some of
them are half timee and some of them are
more than that because managing a pool
and managing a pool hours is what Lisa
has to do with lots of people doing Lots
you probably have some lifeguards out
there you know who work very few hours
others that work more so that's really
the one and a half increase in the
budget overall when you look at it but
it's just kind of hard to count those
because you have just so many
part-timers um Economic Development
added a customer service special mid
year and then the building inspector
that you've added for fy2 is the the
increase from 7 to eight there and
Museum and Fleet have had no
changes so if I can remind you when we
go to the special Revenue funds water
picked up two in midy year and W it
during the budget cycle from just
general fund Public Works everybody else
stayed the same so overall the real the
real total is that you added a battalion
sheet Chief and you added a building
inspector and you Dro two police
officers that's that's really the net
effect to the whole budget so in terms
of
Staffing
um getting into the meat of it this is
our this is our heaviest uh construction
slide so this is your herf uh Road funds
your excise tax funds and your Bridge
fund the uh com I I combine them all
because they're all interrelated you
have pieces of the panal Creek Bridge
you have pieces of the Jesse hay
sidewalk all of these within these three
funds I will say the CF Revenue funds
are down again that's another state
shared fund it didn't take quite as big
a hit as percentage it's what about
$113,000 less um than last year but it
is uh but we have a larger fund balance
carried forward so there's still uh
money in the her fund to get things done
the excise revenues are based roughly on
the four forecasts so we increase those
a little based on a strong forecast but
again we fully appropriated the fund
balance for work on the road repairs
striping and Paving and the bridge fund
has no new revenues the 4.7 million in
the five million in fund bands is all
those grants that came in in 21 20 21 23
um so all of that is just appropriated
fund balance for completion so I'll I'll
uh talk about the expenses herf
operational expens enses um are up just
about 44,000 and um that's Personnel
that's maintenance as well as um the
construction for herf CIP construction
that 546,000
includes the com the herf portion of the
completion of the panal Creek Bridge
which is 305,000 which is up a little
bit um I think I in December last
December I thought their contribution
would be about
250,000 but we've added about 55,000 to
the herf contri contribution towards
that um there is 147,000 there on herf
contingency that's just sort of a normal
business of planning a 15% contingency
of your operations so if they needed to
spend that or wanted to spend that they
would have to come to council for that
the road tax fund also for its exp
construction that 2.8 million is the 1.7
million towards the completion of panal
Creek Bridge that's the same exact
number I gave you last December for that
and it also has 6 71,000 for Street
repair materials and then there's
another line item in the road excise tax
of about 415,000 which is matching funds
for a couple of different projects
you've got out there Road and sidewalk
grants ad do transportation for
alternative streets as well as the safe
Street Grants so we've kind of got them
you know all that money appropriated
some for the bridge some for maintenance
some for um matching funds for these
grants that are coming in um these are
really your biggest Capital project
projects outside of your whiff alone
projects the water fund
um the um is up about 4.6 million now
the bulk of this is that there was we we
had budgeted 1.3 million for an Army
Corps Grant last year that actually
ended up being a $2.1 million Grant so
there was an increase of 750,000 in the
budget for that as well as the entire $3
million with a water conservation Grant
so that's that's
3,757 thou 750,000 of that growth is
just that um that water conservation
Grant and the Army Corps Grant um that's
in both the revenues and expenditures
there is a fund balance carry forward of
about 2.7 million which is in part um
that includes your securing future water
so in that line in the expense you see
1.4 million for securing future water if
you'll recall
750,000 of that you've appropriated as a
match for the water conservation Grant
so there's still another 700,000 that's
won't get spent because that's part of
your securing future water balance and
then there is a lot of Grant and capital
expenditures here um so we're there's a
lot of what you see here is spending of
that one-time fund balance but there is
still an operational deficit in the
water fund which you are having
addressed through the fee study right
now so when we plan the revenues when
you look at the revenues here for this
budget it does do include half a year of
a fee increase so if that does not occur
if that is not the council's decision
there may be some recalculating of the
route as we like to say so um but the
both the water and the sewer are are
based somewhat on a a budget um a water
rate study and
adjustment um so similarly for the sewer
fund this one actually went down 1.1
million and that's in part because there
was a grant budgeted for 750,000 for a
Citywide sewer study that didn't
materialize last year and so that's just
part of the reason that that budget has
dropped there is a also decrease in the
fund balance carry forward because we
actually used some of it as planned last
year several projects were completed the
oxidation ditch cleanout the clarifier
rehab the manhole Improvement project so
as you get things done your your fund
balance carry forward does go um does
get used up um and this is where you
have that 600,000 in fund balance use
for the jeder truck um so that we don't
have to keep leasing trucks um like the
water fund the operational costs do need
to be addressed by the fee study and
this Revenue budget does include six
months of a new rate
increase the fun one the library the
library fund is supported by the general
fund transfer of
ations that I um told you about at the
beginning this does include that 18,000
for completion of the patio so this is
something that we just recently
increased um from the the last council's
uh recommendation last council meeting
recommendation and of the operational
Revenue that you see there of the
136,000
131,00 is from the hila County Library
funding so I they have the one of the
more simple budgets active adult also is
supported by the general f with a
transfer in of about
107,000 this is actually less than uh
last year's because uh some of their
funding increased um unexpectedly and
there is a remaining bit of funding from
a golf fundraiser that was held a few
years ago that I just asked was like is
there still money left and they said yes
so we appropriated that for use next
year so we've uh mitigated a little bit
what the general fund will be
contributing to
that and and here are your wiff loans
these are the loans from the water
infrastructure and Finance Authority of
Arizona um the 2014 and 2017 witha loans
are fully received and expended although
payments are still being made on the
bond debt for 2005 2014 and 2017 but
that that debt is included in the water
operational budget um so there's about
76,000 is principal on your Whiffle
loans in your water operational budget
the new water Water and Wastewater
grants will be future applications for 2
million I did just put up one and a half
million in the budget they those just
don't get spent in in the first year
that they're applied for certainly
um and my understanding is that these
won't be applied for until the rate
studies are completed and Council has
the opportunity to evaluate the impact
of those rate increases on the
operational
budgets a noise when I do that
and this is a very simple look at the
grant fund we um we had a big number
last year 21.1 95 million we actually
dropped that a little to 19 million this
is really what you talk about this is
about capacity this is if the grants
come along if the Appropriations come
from the federal government if the state
says they're going to you know write you
a check you just want to have the
ability to accept it um otherwise it
does give you also capacity elsewhere in
your budget um so you can always reduce
the grant fund and increase another one
um we will I will bring up and we did
this last year these are the kinds of
grants that are out there and that we're
looking for and Paul do you want to talk
about any of these
or let me pull up a the version you can
see yeah so no I mean this is um
straight out of uh the majority of um
our Public Works uh
CIP um you have the the we have some
Partner money the A+ affluent and the
Citywide sewer and and water M plan um
sewer assessment that's about six seven8
and a half million that that we hope to
get from from up to that much on our
partners uh we got the Army Core money
um growing smarter we we have um uh BHP
we have the Brownfield I mean you can
see for yourself Michaelson's still in
there hanging out and then Cinema guy
goes water um we have that additional
money coming in um it it shows how
effective our federal legislative
program has been um you know it takes
two things you have to have the
opportunities there and then the ability
to reel them in and land the money and
and the op has been there and we were we
timing was impeccable we're ready to go
when this stuff is out there we were
hitting it and we've done very well so
um I think this reflects that and then
some police stuff in there but you
know we bring in a lot of this big
infrastructure stuff but but police and
fire are always pecking away to knock
down our cost with the the the bunch of
Grants they have they're not as many
zeros behind them but they're very
helpful to their budgets and and we
appreciate those grants
also calling the Yuma bridge is that's a
state appropriation is that still in the
state budget or did they cut that off oh
it's gone um yeah
they were they The Good the good news is
they they cut about 333 million of with
of money but it's not our withth of
money it's a different bank of withi of
money but um but no The Yuma bridge and
a lot of those rural projects did not
make it but if they hang around for a
couple years you know it can come back
so you just you just never know and so
um we we parked that in there just in
case uh you know something happens and
and it is revived somehow um will tell
you uh representative cook David Cook
does a a great job of of bringing um you
know bring money back to his district um
you know con's Bridge among other things
and then the additions for the um the
additional cost for both conies and
Cottonwood so we want to be prepared if
somehow the Stars line and and and we
hit the home run on the um hit a home
run on the Ula
bridge and the last slide I think that I
have is one you can't even see or read
but it's just the auditor general form
this is this is what gets publish this
shows your budgeted expenditures in the
bottom right corner of 66
m324 I apologize the agenda item had a
rounding error in it I think your agenda
item says
245 we can go down from that tenative to
final whichever whichever whichever way
you want to uh make the motion Shelly
you can take care of whatever is
appropriate for that so this is what
gets published in the newspaper um and
there you see the in fund transfers of
305,000
so uh with that U Paul already covered
this that this will get posted for the
next uh two weeks and then the public
hearing will be on the 16th and the
final public hearing on the tax levy and
Adoption of the levy will be on July
30th and I had I really have had a great
time this year working with the staff
members getting to know a lot of them
we've had a lot of back and forth
they've been really good about asking me
where should I post this where do I move
it um I still have had you know a lot of
journal entries that we're doing trying
to sort things out get them in the right
buckets um but that's that's just that's
the technicalities but we just want you
as a a city to be able to move forward
with your goals and in Mr Mayor members
Council been a pleasure working with
Tina um Tina myself and Pat Walker will
get on these these budget calls and then
eventually they geek out so much that
they either throw me off or I go off and
do something else but uh but pat pat
Walker has been been following this and
looking over this um also because she is
the you know she's the one that is
making sure that that we're on the
straight and level and and flying right
um as with her vast experience in
Municipal
budgeting have any questions
yeah um not a question i' just like to
make a comment to the general public um
you know that these budget seasons in
this this this whole budget process um
is far from just a rubber stamp there's
a lot of work that goes on behind the
scenes from our Consultants to our city
manager um to all of our department
heads um and just having multiple
conversations about where
uh where the money needs to be spent and
and even this this mayor and Council
spending a lot of time uh going over
these numbers and and um and then
ultimately coming to a decision um it's
I can't even put it in hours I would
think it would probably be hundreds
maybe a couple hundred hours combined
this it's a it's a lengthy process but
we we don't have a gigantic budget but
we have a very complex budget right we
have lot of different nooks and crannies
and and funds we leverage money against
other money very creatively and Pat
Walker's always known that we've had um
you know a lot of different elements in
there that we make work together and and
Tina has jumped in and figured out all
those and straightened out you know it's
just it's amazing the your your memory
for where these funds can't started and
and went but yeah but um but no it is a
it is a um is making sure that we you
know the use the right money in the
right spot to get the right projects uh
we're doing really good about making
sure we carry money forward so we don't
one of our habits before is we making
sure that everything got across from the
old budget to the new budget and so the
lots of meetings and Public Works is
usually that's where that that happens
we still have three weeks that if
anybody sees anything um hopefully this
is going to go back with very minimal
changes unless of course uh we look at
it and it's like oh my gosh we forgot X
Y or Z and we'll we'll have to do that
hopefully we've gotten everything in
there um but so we have three more weeks
to scrutinize it it can't grow if there
is a change it's just a change between
um contingency and and whatever might be
or rearranging in the within the
Departments so Tina would hope for no
changes whatsoever but that ship already
sailed um so I'm going for under a half
dozen okay well and all the work and
you're right we you know we don't have a
very big budget but um a lot of the
things that we're making happen here is
is due to the hard work from our staff
the grant writers the just going and
finding those those dollars that are out
there um that if if you don't go after
it you'll never get it and so um one
thing that's certain it's out there um
we just got to be able to find the
mechanisms to get it and uh I
mean it's from fire grants from police
grants
um you know just everybody that is out
there uh just turning those St the
stones over to see what can come of it
and um it's just really amazing and and
I applied I applied all of you for that
that work um you know I was talking to
somebody um another councilman from
another town and um you know we were
talking about yeah you know being on
Council is just you know you can't do a
whole lot unless you're a body right as
an individual there's not a lot you can
do but uh he told me some words of
wisdom and he says you know is the one
thing you can do as a counsel is hire
good
people um and when you hire good people
that's what really makes your your U
Community tick so hats off to all the
staff here everybody from city manager
all the way to the guy that's picking up
or hoing weeds or whatever might be it's
it's just an awesome
um machine so thank you and Mr R members
Council I would be remiss to talk about
I think we have the one of the strongest
relationship with relationships with the
county right now and a lot of partnering
there and then I think we have very
strong relationships with all our minds
all our Partnerships there and and that
plays into a lot of this and the
hospital I mean we're working good with
with everyone and and and it that
regionalism that that started uh with
mayor Gros um has really paid dividends
on top of everything
else I do have one question in a comment
but on on your third uh slide where it
says taxes on 10 million 68 on a
proposed 25 is that just sales tax
revenue does that include property tax
and all that is that just sales tax
revenue so the let me go back up to that
slide so the taxes revenue does include
the property tax includes the half a
million property tax yes okay so so
sales tax would be about 9.5 million
then correct yes good math you're
hired uh the other thing is you know
it's for anybody and we know we got I
don't know if I can say home rule and
what's it called alternative what's the
name of it exp expenditure limit coming
on our uh ballot there's multiple layers
of protection as we as our staff and our
finance EST establish and our Council
establishes this a budget so really if
if home rules were to fail we would be
devastated we could not spend the money
that we have and uh so I I really
encourage all our residents to get
educated with what the budget process is
and and what the what the limits are and
the layers of protection as we do this
this uh budget but thanks staff same
Freddy Echo that and Tina thank you very
much for all the
work thank
you other questions are comments I make
a motion to approve the adoption of the
city of globe fiscal year 2425 tenative
budget in the amount Pro to exceed
66,329 which includes $9 million in
unfunded Grant requests and direction to
and clst the retired attorney general
forms and approve the public hearing
date of July 16th 2024 year 2425 final
budget July 30th 2024 for property tax
levy second and Mr Mayor members Council
we we did want to take that down a
dollar take it down
$1 there's a there's some rounding
errors in there and so so all right so
66300 66 m324
yes second on
that
second okay we have a motion the second
for approval of the fiscal year 2425
tenative budget is there any further
discussion all those in favor say I I
oppose
nayy motion pass thank you
again on item seven is late agenda items
we have a update on the council on the
upper Canal Creek Connie Bridge Project
Lise
we waited patiently all
night major members of council I'm here
to talk a little bit about uh our con
Bridge um it's it's coming along uh we
are you know always trying to get the
best
product uh there has been some delays I
don't know if you might have noticed
that the gabian where already in place
and I rejected them because they were
not right so that kind of like puts us a
little bit
behind uh they were starting to you know
get him uh built again uh with the rain
last night uh it got flooded it got a
bunch of mud and they just couldn't
continue There we've been working also
on the approach lab on the north side of
the bridge uh they've been installing
the the rebar we're getting ready to
pour uh we had to pour first what they
called this sleeper which is kind of
like the support for the uh approach
slab um we been working on uh basically
redesigning the installation of the
lighting because we didn't have a
detailed uh you know design for that
it's been under work for three weeks at
least H and that was
critical before we ped the curve in the
sidewalk because we had to decide where
the conduit was going to be running and
where it was going to be coming up from
the concrete depending on the
configuration of the lighting uh we had
a meeting this morning and uh you know
we had the designer there we have the
electrical
engineer uh myself of MDC electric and
we came up with a plan that we think is
going to work so we're waiting on on the
designer to give us
revised uh
drawings and specs for the material that
we're going to be using because MDC
wouldn't go to work if they didn't have
an approved and standard set of plans so
everything kind of like uh takes its
time but uh one thing uh I want to
assure is that uh I wouldn't sacrific
the quality to push this project to get
it done and and you know I know people
is impatient they've been asking
question what's going on what's
Happening uh it's not easy to explain
all the you know situations that we need
to go through in order to get it
right but uh uh it's got to be done the
correct way and and uh now we are a
little behind we were aiming basically
Meridian was aiming to have it ready for
the radal to start the installation of
the gates and the lights by August the
8th but that is going to be pushed now
with all these issues in the way uh
we're going to have a meeting tomorrow
withan which is our weekly meeting uh
and also to ask them for a detailed you
know uh schedule a revised schedule to
see you know where we're going with this
and and see what is their intent as far
as making more
progress uh
probably they need to bring more neers
you know more workers to to have
two or three activities going on at the
same time instead of you know going one
after the other that takes
longer so we're going to have that
conversation tomorrow and see you know
what we can uh you know get from them um
but uh what you see is is something that
uh is is well built you know it's it's
taking time but uh we need to solve all
those uh issues that we encounter to
make sure that uh you know our brace is
safe and and
durable so so Mr Mayor members Council
um Louise myself and John met today we
talked about a lot of these things going
on um I intend to I intend to attend
that meeting tomorrow um I I asked Lis
as like you know can we give a date and
he is not able to do that we are going
to l and I are going to ask the
contractor um to put in uh to come up
with a timeline and bring that back to
council at the next meeting on July 9th
um ask them to present and explain uh
where they're at and and what day they
believe or what week what their time
frame will be um I intend to work
backwards I I I must say that a couple
things this is this is not the railroads
holding this up at at this point um I
don't believe that that you you won't
find that the problem um right now it's
a series of of this has to happen before
this before this and we need to make
sure that the turnaround from each thing
happening is happening on a tighter
schedule um I think they can throw some
more resources at it and and make sure
that they don't put themselves back into
a liquid damages condition um and I'm
going to encourage them to do that and
we'll see what we can what we come back
with and have them come and ask them to
give a date uh for when it will be
completed Mr Mayor Mike you got a
question Lise how did the the bridge
hold up with this
last rain you still
there anything did anything get
compromised no now the the only the only
issue that we had is as I said that you
know with the Creek Running uh a lot of
mud came into you know the area where
they were installing those gabian and
now they're filled with mud so they
going to have go back and clean it again
and so they can keep coming up but uh
other than that you know the bridge is
fine yeah they did a pretty bad job on
the gab on yeah and that's why I
rejected him and then I had him tore
them apart and redo them so Mr Mays
Council I I told Lis it's like if he
wasn't keeping such a good eye on him
this you know and then again we're not
gonna let him uh get away with anything
uh you know in VI of uh showing progress
and and and making this you know kind of
like uh move really fast uh I'm sorry
but uh i' rather have them you know go
back and redo things even if it takes
another couple of weeks than having a
product that I'm not satisfied with with
and the people is not going to be happy
with and those GS need to be built in
the right way you know
uh uh otherwise you know with a a big uh
rain vein probably they'll kind of sink
settle and come down and you know we
really don't want that so that's why you
know we redoing that Mar Mr Mayor the
the tour with that we took a couple
months ago uh answered a lot of
questions for me and looking at the all
of the forms and settings and support
that had to be in place to do the final
pour answered a lot of questions for me
the rest are details with Mother Nature
and that's all we can do is react to
that um the the Gabon
baskets you have to be good at doing
that and you have to write you do have
to have the right equipment to mold it
and then place it and I've seen many
good construction project projects like
that across the state but by I'm
satisfied with the tour where they're
headed uh the rest is Mother Nature I've
received a few comments I've seen a few
comments water runs when it rains we
don't control that so the reality is U
we're at Mother Nature's Mercy until we
get it uh up and running and we still
have some some deliverables to to do and
I get that as well so I've always said
I'm a patient man when it comes to to
construction because you have to be and
that's where we're at right now so
continue on that Journey then thank you
sir so personally I I would rather see
the job be done a year from now and be
done correctly then not done right at
all uh the one thing that makes me a
little nervous is is that um it seems
like they've had to redo quite a few
things and um I'm not I don't remember
us requiring them to have a performance
bond and so that makes me nervous that a
company could go out of business and
then we're stuck with what's not done um
and I know that that's a a tough call
because if you add a performance bond
you're probably what adding 25 30% to
the cost I don't think it's that much
but all our projects have performance
bond oh do they this one has a
performance B correct this one has per B
right um I'll have to go back
contract I
um I I know I know I know there's a bond
for the project in general you know
uh we because we talked about well and
we're getting into a conversation that
may be better for if need be in E
session the contract and and things I
will tell you it also has um like say
liquid damages extended over time and if
they if they bypass the the the the
railroads are the last piece to go in if
they're still working on it after the
railroads are done then it kicks back
into uh some uh time
penalties but it but it is a a a set cap
whether it takes them you know three
more days or three more weeks it doesn't
cost us anything unless we make a change
uh but but if they need to fix something
that is not a change order for us that
is not a cost for us um it is something
that that they will cover and so when
when people think that it's see that
it's going so long the the price has not
significantly gone up other than things
that we had control
over but Mr Mayor I think you had asked
about and I think it's a good idea
um every two weeks we'll have a an
update and call it Louis job security
here question Luis losing sleep I think
I don't have any questions Lis I just
want to thank you the city's lucky to
have a person like you that doesn't
doesn't take quality
over you know making sure it's done
professional yeah that that's basically
you know my my goal uh as he said uh you
know if it takes a little longer but uh
but do it right I I will have't redo you
know anything that is I respects or or
you know visually not uh you know
appealing or uh I mean I'm I'm on top of
everything you know and so so if if they
they're not able to do the electrical
connections right they're going to have
to redo them that's thank you yeah yeah
I want to add to that thank you Louise
and any staff that is there putting the
time in to making sure at the end of the
day we have a quality project you know
there's a lot of chatter out there we
see it on Facebook we hear it in in the
streets but you know at the end of the
day all we're after is that we get the
top-notch professional bridge that we
wanted in the beginning and uh it's not
hindering any traffic we're lucky we
still have the other bridge that they're
using so that is correct yeah yes so Mr
Mayor members Council I just got a quick
text from Jessica in public works says
yes they do have a performance
fond so you go
L she's got your back got my back
good okay thank you Luis all right thank
you you thank
you we go to our second call to the
public do we have anybody
online we have six people watching I
think they're all staff um six that's it
on the on the at least on the zoom on
the YouTube let me check the mail
quick no I don't see anything
on nothing on the phone okay uh
scheduling no
meetings um just the schedule you saw
with the the on the 16th we're
scheduling to have of July
the and that's in my in both July 16th 6
July 16th yeah July 6 final that'll be
the final adoption and then the 30th the
16th will be a nighttime meeting it's an
off Tuesday you have a 2:30 meeting too
there's another one yeah that's the 30th
because that's election day okay yeah so
you can have a quick meeting and go off
and vote quick sure so
quick so um so but those would be the
the two meetings I would point out the
fact is that um because the 3-we span we
will um set a meeting for Tuesday July
16th at 6 p.m. um just for the final
budget adoption and anything else that
is pressing but I I think we'll be okay
and then the uh adoption of the levy on
the
30th can uh just comment on briefly on
the bed tax meeting just so let the rest
of the council know that we are moving
forward it has been going forward
positive we've had good conversation
ation built a relationship um we did our
counter offer and we're waiting you know
I think it's not going to delay us from
moving into the budget with a new with a
new amounts but it's just contracts and
discussion but it's going very well I
think uh future agenda items anybody
have any we we had the Boys and Girls
Club update and then we'll have ongoing
updates on the um the county Bridge
until it's
completed
else motion to go into executive session
second motion second e session all those
in favor say I
I thank you
for e